Chapter

1

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu
Pai, and Jeffrey Dobyns

Preoperative Evaluation The preoperative evaluation is a review of a
patient’s physical condition in preparation for surgery. The history and
physical examination are the foundation of this assessment and focus on
identifying predisposing factors for cardiac and pulmonary complications
and on determining a patient’s functional capacity to deﬁne ﬁtness for
surgery. The history and physical examination ﬁndings determine the need
for additional laboratory or diagnostic testing if such evaluation
changes the course of action or improves patient health and outcomes.
Presurgical medical optimization, including proper subspecialty
consultation, improves surgical outcomes in patients with coexisting
diseases. Preoperative preparation and optimization eﬀorts focus on
identifying and mitigating modiﬁable risk factors to improve surgical
and longitudinal outcomes while reducing healthcare costs.

Elements of Preoperative Evaluation The essential component of the
preoperative evaluation is the history, which details past and current
medical and surgical status, family and genetic history, and
documentation of tobacco, alcohol, and substance use. A detailed list of
allergies and reactions, as well as previous anesthetic experiences,
helps formulate the anesthetic plan. A complete 12-point review of
systems identiﬁes any undiagnosed or inadequately optimized disease.
Cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases are the primary drivers of adverse
perioperative outcomes and are the most relevant in determining ﬁtness
for anesthesia and surgery \[1\]. A focused preoperative physical
examination includes, at a minimum, documentation of vital signs,
including height and weight, with body mass index (BMI) calculation, and
an assessment of the airway, lungs, and heart, and a basic neurologic
examination. Unexpected abnormal ﬁndings on the physical examination,
such as a new heart murmur or an unexplained decline in functional
capacity, compel investigation before elective surgery. 4

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

5

Medication Reconciliation A complete medication history, including
current and new drug therapy and unusual reactions or responses to
drugs, ensures safe perioperative care. Medications that provide
physiologic homeostasis should be continued preoperatively. The decision
to continue, discontinue, or modify chronic medication regimens requires
thoughtful risk–beneﬁt analysis. Polypharmacy is common in elderly
patients, and the preoperative evaluation is an opportunity to identify
and mitigate duplicated medications and those with crossreactivity. This
encounter is also an opportunity to ensure that appropriate stroke and
cardiovascular risk reduction strategies, such as statin therapy, are in
place.

Risk Stratiﬁcation Perioperative risk is determined by healthcare,
patient, and socio-economic factors \[2\]. Healthcare factors include
elements speciﬁc to the type and magnitude of the surgical procedure and
those encompassing anesthesia type and management techniques employed,
such as goal-directed ﬂuid therapy. Patient characteristics include ﬁxed
risk factors, such as age and genetics, and modiﬁable risk factors, such
as smoking, nutrition status, and anemia. Perioperative outcomes are
directly aﬀected by social determinants of health, such as economic
stability, physical environment, and level of education. Deciding to
have surgery is a complex consideration of risks, short- and long-term
beneﬁts, alternatives, and eﬀects on longitudinal health. A primary goal
of the preoperative evaluation is to make surgery safer by estimating
the total risk relative to the beneﬁts of proceeding with surgery and
reducing modiﬁable risk. Communicating the risk to the patient, along
with risk reduction strategies in the interest of shared
decision-making, aﬀects whether or not to proceed with surgery.

ASA Physical Status Classiﬁcation Originally intended to assess and
communicate a patient’s preanesthesia medical comorbidities, the
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status
classiﬁcation is a current standard of risk assessment and a mandated
element of the preanesthetic evaluation by the Joint Commission. The ASA
scoring system alone does not predict perioperative risks. When combined
with other factors such as frailty and functional status, it
demonstrates excellent risk prediction, and higher scores correlate with
increased postoperative morbidity and mortality \[3\]. This scale is
based solely on the presence of existing disease and does not consider
the risk of the surgical procedure.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

6

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns

Cardiac Cardiac functional status or capacity, expressed as metabolic
equivalents (METs), is determined subjectively by assessment with a
brief set of questions and has been thought to be positively associated
with postoperative outcomes. Many risk models rely on this assessment.
Achieving four METs of activity without symptoms is a good prognostic
indicator of perioperative outcomes \[4\]. A subjective assessment of
functional status does not accurately identify patients with inadequate
functional capacity or predict postoperative morbidity or mortality
\[5\]. The Duke Activity Status Index (DASI) provides an objective
assessment of functional capacity. Compared with cardiopulmonary
exercise testing and subjective assessment of functional capacity, only
DASI scores successfully predicted the primary outcomes of myocardial
injury or death at 30 days. A DASI score of &lt;34 is associated with an
increased risk of 30-day death, myocardial infarction (MI), and moderate
to severe complications \[6\]. All patients scheduled for noncardiac
surgery should have an initial assessment of the percentage risk of a
major adverse cardiac event (MACE) using validated models that include
information from the history and physical examination, objective
functional capacity score, electrocardiogram, laboratory studies, and
planned procedure. The calculated risk aids the patient and
perioperative specialists in weighing the risks and beneﬁts and
determining the optimal timing of surgery. The risk score guides
decision-making as to whether the planned surgery should proceed without
further preoperative cardiovascular testing or whether postponement for
additional testing is indicated. Preoperative risk stratiﬁcation is also
instrumental in determining if a patient would beneﬁt from preoperative
coronary revascularization or consideration of a lesser-risk or
nonsurgical alternative. The risk assessment occasionally uncovers
undiagnosed problems or inadequately managed chronic conditions
requiring optimization. The decision to pursue further cardiovascular
testing considers both shortand long-term risk reductions. The Revised
Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI) or the American College of Surgeons National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) risk prediction tool are
two commonly used risk indices. The RCRI is simpler and has been widely
used and validated for many years. The NSQIP calculator is more complex,
requiring calculation through an online algorithm. A more
straightforward tool derived from the NSQIP database is the Gupta
myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest (MICA) calculator. The newer
Cardiovascular Risk Index (CVRI) is a validated model with higher
discriminatory power than the RCRI \[7\]. For patients at low MACE risk
(&lt;1%), no further testing is indicated. For patients with higher MACE
risk (&gt;1%) and inadequate functional capacity (&lt;4 METs), the
question

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

7

becomes whether further cardiovascular testing will change management
and improve the outcome.

Pulmonary Postoperative pulmonary complications adversely inﬂuence a
patient’s postoperative course. They are a signiﬁcant source of
postoperative morbidity and mortality, resulting in substantial
increases in healthcare resource utilization. Table 1.1 details the
patient and surgical risk factors associated with postoperative
pulmonary complications. The ARISCAT Risk Index is a commonly used risk
prediction tool to identify patients at risk of postoperative pulmonary
complications and likely to beneﬁt from presurgical risk reduction
interventions, such as increased physical activity and preoperative
incentive spirometry. All available risk indices provide a reliable
estimation of postoperative pulmonary complication risk, but the ARISCAT
Risk Index is the most practical for preoperative assessment. The
strongest predictor for postoperative pulmonary complications is poor
functional capacity. Any history suggesting unrecognized chronic lung
disease or heart failure, such as reduced functional capacity,
unexplained dyspnea, or cough, requires further evaluation. Pulmonary
function tests and routine chest X-rays do not appreciably add to risk
stratiﬁcation. Table 1.1 Predictive risk factors for postoperative
pulmonary complications Patient risk factors

Surgical risk factors

• • • • • • • • •

• Upper abdominal or thoracic

• • • • a

Age &gt;50 yearsa Preexisting pulmonary disease Obstructive sleep apnea
ASA physical status of 3 or higher Current smoking Heart failure Poor
functional capacity/frailty Malnutrition Diabetes with
hyperglycemia/elevated hemoglobin A1c Preoperative anemiaa Morbid
obesity Preoperative oxygen saturation below 95%a Respiratory infection
within preceding montha

surgerya

• Emergency surgerya • Surgery lasting longer than 2 hoursa

• General versus combined general and regional anesthesia

• Intraoperative ﬂuid management strategy

• Blood transfusion • Neuromuscular blockade

Factors assessed by the ARISCAT Risk Index.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

8

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns

Preoperative Optimization and Prehabilitation Safe and eﬃcient surgical
and anesthesia practice requires a ﬁt and medically optimized patient.
Numerous epidemiological studies indicate that inadequate preoperative
preparation is a signiﬁcant contributory factor to the primary causes of
perioperative morbidity and mortality. Postoperative morbidity is a
signiﬁcant surgical outcome in terms of economic consequences to
healthcare institutions. Preoperative comorbidities, coupled with
surgical complexity, predict adverse outcomes and increased healthcare
resource utilization. Given preoperative time and resource limitations,
it is reasonable to focus these eﬀorts on patients at high risk of
postoperative morbidity and mortality. Preoperative optimization and
prehabilitation represent prudent economic strategies for reducing
short- and long-term healthcare expenses and improving longitudinal
population health. Preoperative optimization is a process of
clinician-managed interventions not directly involving patient eﬀort or
behavior modiﬁcation, such as medication adjustment, glucose management,
or anemia correction, designed to prepare the patient psychologically
and physiologically to handle the stress of surgery. Prehabilitation
diﬀers from optimization and is the active preoperative process of
enhancing a patient’s functional capacity to allow better tolerance of
the stressors of surgery and recovery. Prehabilitation eﬀorts
implemented to improve postoperative outcomes involve lifestyle
interventions, such as nutritional supplementation, physical exercise,
stress reduction, and smoking cessation.

Coexisting Disease Cardiac Ischemic Heart Disease Patients with coronary
stents undergoing noncardiac surgery are at high MACE risk even when
receiving perioperative antiplatelet therapy, and withholding one or
both antiplatelet medications increases the risk of thrombosis. They are
also at high risk of signiﬁcant bleeding when one or both medications
are continued. MACEs, including stroke, are mainly related to previous
medical conditions and perioperative blood loss, and not to the surgery
itself. In patients undergoing noncardiac surgery after a percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) with second-generation drug-eluting stents,
the incidence of MACEs, including death, MI, stent thrombosis, and the
need for repeat revascularization, was highest in the ﬁrst 6 months
after the PCI \[8\]. Elective procedures should be delayed for at least
6 months in patients with drug-eluting stents, at least 30 days for
those with bare-metal stents, and 14 days following balloon angioplasty
to allow for uninterrupted dual antiplatelet therapy.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

9

Hypertension Perioperative hypertension is primarily a manifestation of
acute or acute-onchronic hypertension. Perioperative hypertension occurs
mainly for two reasons: (1) worsening of chronic hypertension; or (2) a
response to transient factors, such as pain, anxiety, or withholding of
blood pressure medications. Hypertension is not a signiﬁcant factor for
determining perioperative cardiac risk, but it does contribute to
several conditions that are, such as chronic renal disease and diastolic
dysfunction. In the absence of acute end-organ dysfunction, there is
little justiﬁcation for case cancellation for blood pressures below
180/110 mmHg. Isolated systolic hypertension (ISH) is the most common
type of hypertension in the elderly. It is associated with a two- to
fourfold increase in the risk of MI, left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH),
renal dysfunction, stroke, and cardiovascular mortality. Characteristics
of ISH include a widened pulse pressure and a systolic blood pressure of
≥140 mmHg, with a diastolic blood pressure of &lt;90 mmHg. Elderly
patients beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from therapies to reduce systolic blood
pressure. The preoperative treatment of ISH risks diastolic hypotension
and compromise of perfusion to vascular beds, and requires careful
consideration.

Bioprosthetic and Mechanical Heart Valves Anticoagulation management in
the patient with a bioprosthetic or mechanical valve undergoing surgery
considers the type, location, and number of prosthetic heart valves,
planned surgical procedure and bleeding risk, and other patient risk
factors for thromboembolism, and the planned procedure. The primary
concern with interrupting anticoagulation is thromboembolism, which
carries a 20% mortality rate and a 40% rate of signiﬁcant disability
\[9\]. The decision to interrupt anticoagulation and whether or not to
bridge with low-molecular-weight heparin requires stratiﬁcation of a
patient’s risk of thromboembolism versus signiﬁcant bleeding.
Thromboembolism risk stratiﬁcation tools, such as the BleedMAP and
HAS-BLED scores, are useful in clinical decision-making. Patients
undergoing procedures with associated low bleeding risk should be
continued on their regular anticoagulation regimen. The thromboembolic
risk is highest within the ﬁrst three months of bioprosthetic or
mechanical mitral valve replacement or repair. Noncardiac surgery should
be deferred to avoid interruption of anticoagulation.

Heart Failure Heart failure represents a spectrum of disease, and
perioperative risk varies depending on where the patient is along the
continuum. Risk is lowest for those patients with asymptomatic diastolic
dysfunction where ejection fraction is preserved, and highest for those
at the end-stage with reduced ejection fraction.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

10

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns

The postoperative mortality risk is higher in patients with heart
failure than in those with coronary artery disease, and elderly patients
with heart failure have substantially higher risks of postoperative
mortality and hospital readmission. The preoperative assessment goals
for heart failure patients before noncardiac surgery include: assessing
functional status; identifying asymptomatic patients who are at risk of
developing heart failure in the postoperative period; determining
whether heart failure patients are stable and optimally managed or
showing signs and symptoms of decompensation; recognizing high-risk
heart failure syndromes, including new-onset heart failure; and
identifying comorbidities that impact the stability of heart failure in
the postoperative period. The inability to achieve 4 METs functional
capacity by walking four average-length city blocks and climbing two
ﬂights of stairs without experiencing symptomatic limitation was 71%
sensitive and 47% speciﬁc for predicting severe postoperative
complications. Given the critical prognostic implications of functional
capacity to surgical outcomes, the New York Heart Association (NYHA)
functional classiﬁcation (see Table 1.2) categorizes heart failure
patients based on functional capacity limitations and symptom
development. Postoperative mortality increases with severity of the
preoperative functional impairment, from 4% in NYHA class 1 to 67% in
class IV. Asymptomatic diastolic dysfunction is common in elderly and
hypertensive patients and presents considerable perioperative
challenges. Diastolic dysfunction is an underestimated disease and is
independently associated with major adverse outcomes in patients
undergoing both cardiac or noncardiac surgery. The most straightforward
approach to recognizing asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction is
maintaining a high index of suspicion

Table 1.2 New York Heart Association functional classiﬁcation NYHA class

Symptoms

I

No limitations of physical activity. Ordinary activity does not cause
dyspnea, palpitations, or fatigue

II

Slight limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest, but
ordinary physical activity results in dyspnea, palpitations, or fatigue

III

Pronounced limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest, but
less-than-ordinary physical activity results in dyspnea, palpitations,
or fatigue

IV

Unable to carry on any physical activity without discomfort. Symptoms of
heart failure at rest. Discomfort increases with any physical activity

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

11

when a patient provides a history of risk factors or presents with
particular physical signs, such as resting tachycardia or the presence
of a fourth heart sound. Identiﬁcation of suspicious signs and symptoms
warrants prompt cardiology referral. A risk stratiﬁcation model, such as
the RCRI or NSQIP calculator, including heart failure as a procedural
risk factor provides an accurate MACE risk assessment. Both models oﬀer
an estimation of MACEs, but the NSQIP calculator also provides estimates
of several other adverse outcomes, such as postoperative pulmonary
complications (PPCs) and expected length of stay.

Pulmonary The ARISCAT index identiﬁes patients at risk of PPC and guides
preoperative optimization strategies, as described in Table 1.3. Those
at low risk of PPCs beneﬁt from simple recommendations, such as
practicing good oral hygiene and early mobilization. Those patients at
intermediate and high risk of PPCs beneﬁt from preoperative incentive
spirometry and increased activity and advanced lung-protective
ventilation maneuvers. All patients undergoing general anesthesia beneﬁt
from low-tidal-volume ventilation strategies. The use of inhaled
bronchodilators more than three times a day in patients with chronic
lung disease warrants the preoperative addition of maintenance
medications. Table 1.3 Perioperative pulmonary risk mitigation
strategies Low risk of PPC

Intermediate risk of PPC

High risk of PPC

Early mobilization

All of low maneuvers, plus:

All of low and intermediate maneuvers, plus:

Good oral hygiene

Postoperative incentive spirometry

1–2 weeks of preoperative incentive spirometry

Optimization of chronic lung disease

Identiﬁcation and communication of “increased risk” status

Increased postoperative surveillance

Smoking cessation counseling and resources

Regional anesthesia/ analgesia, if applicable Lung-protective
ventilation

Source: Used with permission from Pfeifer, K. Guide to Preoperative
Evaluation. www .preopevalguide.com, 2020.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

12

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns

Tobacco, Marijuana, and Vaping Use Smoking within 1 year of surgery is
associated with increased postoperative complications, including poor
wound healing, increased healthcare costs, increased hospitalization,
and higher utilization of healthcare resources. Preoperative smoking
cessation reduces the incidence of these complications and, when
maintained long term, improves population health in general. Each week
of smoking cessation before surgery decreases the complication risk by
19%, and cessation of one year or more reduces PPC risk to that of a
nonsmoker \[10\]. Preoperative smoking cessation counseling and nicotine
replacement therapy increase the likelihood of long-term abstinence.
Like the use of traditional tobacco, chronic marijuana use results in
similar long-term eﬀects to cigarette use. Preoperative abstinence,
comparable to that seen with smoking cessation, leads to a reduction in
the risk of adverse outcomes. There has been an increase in the usage of
electronic (e-)cigarettes in recent years. While e-cigarettes do not
contain the harmful combustion byproducts of traditional cigarettes,
they contain toxic solvents, such as glycerol and propylene glycol, and
chemical ﬂavorings. Vaping by patients undergoing plastic surgery
exhibited an increased risk of skin ﬂap necrosis and death.
Perioperative vaping instructions and cessation eﬀorts are identical to
those for tobacco users.

Pulmonary Hypertension The preoperative preparation of patients with
pulmonary hypertension is a multidisciplinary eﬀort critical to a good
outcome for these patients. It focuses on determining the severity of
the disease and the adequacy of physiologic and pharmacologic
compensation. All pulmonary hypertension medications continue throughout
the day of surgery, including diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEIs), and sildenaﬁl, to prevent acute decompensation.
Laboratory studies are indicated, based on patient physical status and
medication management. An electrocardiogram identiﬁes right ventricular
hypertrophy and evidence of right heart strain, and recent
echocardiography assesses right ventricular function and pulmonary
artery pressures. Evidence of right ventricular failure warrants case
delay for further medical management.

Obstructive Sleep Apnea Patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) have
a two- to fourfold higher risk of perioperative complications than
patients without OSA. Respiratory complications, such as desaturation
and respiratory failure, are the most common. Undiagnosed severe OSA is
signiﬁcantly associated with an increased risk of 30-day postoperative
cardiovascular complications \[11\]. Other perioperative complications
include diﬃculty with airway management, cardiovascular complications,
and postoperative delirium, all leading to higher resource

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

13

utilization. Given the increasing prevalence and associated
perioperative risks of OSA, the Society of Anesthesia and Sleep Medicine
recommends screening all presurgical patients for OSA. The STOP-Bang
questionnaire is the best-validated tool for preoperative screening for
OSA. Patients with zero to two positive responses are considered low
risk; those with three or four are at intermediate risk, and those with
≥5 positive responses are at high risk of having OSA. An elevated serum
bicarbonate increases the speciﬁcity of intermediate STOP-Bang scores. A
high risk score of 5–8 was associated with an increased cardiovascular
risk following surgery and intensive care unit (ICU) readmission. In
contrast, a moderate risk score of 3 or 4 was associated with an
increased risk of ICU readmission and wound infection. Most patients
with known or suspected OSA may proceed to surgery without additional
testing or treatment for OSA. However, select patients beneﬁt from
surgical delay for formal diagnosis by sleep study and for initiation of
therapy or treatment optimization. Patients requiring further testing or
treatment optimization are delayed at least one week for acclimation to
the continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device or adjusted
settings. Patients on CPAP therapy for OSA should continue treatment up
to the day of surgery and bring their CPAP or other treatment devices on
the day of surgery, including controllers for hypoglossal nerve
stimulators.

Frailty Although frailty is independent of chronological age, it is more
prevalent in the geriatric population. Frailty is deﬁned as a decrease
in physiologic reserve exceeding that expected from advanced age alone
and presents with an increased vulnerability to stressors. Sarcopenia,
characterized by a decline in functional capacity with low muscle mass
and strength, is a signiﬁcant component of frailty. Sarcopenia
measurement by preoperative grip strength, gait speed, or chair stand
test provides an accurate diagnosis of the severity of frailty \[12\].
Frailty predicts postoperative mortality and morbidity, including
delirium, increased hospital stay, discharge to a skilled nursing
facility, cognitive impairment, and functional decline \[13\]. The
preoperative evaluation of elderly patients requiring elective major
surgery should include a frailty screen. Most assessment tools involve
scoring based on speciﬁc comorbidities, dependence on others for daily
living activities, malnutrition, and dementia, rather than on physical
assessment alone. There are several validated frailty screening tools,
such as the FRAIL scale (detailed in Table 1.4), but few methods of
objective measurement. FRAIL scale scores range from zero to 5, and a
score of zero represents robust health status and 1–2 a prefrail state,
and 3–5 is consistent with frailty. A positive frailty screen is an
indication for a comprehensive evaluation and

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

14

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns Table 1.4 The FRAIL
scale Description

Question

Score

Fatigue

“Have you felt fatigued for most or all of the time over the past
month?”

Yes = 1 No = 0

Resistance

“Do you have diﬃculty climbing a ﬂight of stairs?”

Yes = 1 No = 0

Ambulation

“Do you have diﬃculty walking one block?”

Yes = 1 No = 0

Illness

“Do you have any of these illnesses: hypertension, diabetes, cancer,
chronic lung disease, heart attack, congestive heart failure, angina,
asthma, arthritis, stroke, and kidney disease?”

≥5 illnesses =1 &lt;5 illnesses =0

Loss of weight

“Have you lost more than 5% of your weight in the past year?”

Yes = 1 No = 0

Source: Morely, JE, Malmstrom, TK, Miller, DK. A simple frailty
questionnaire (FRAIL) predicted outcomes in middle aged African
Americans. J Nutr Health Aging. 2012;16(7):601–8.

intervention by a geriatric medicine specialist. Identiﬁcation of
preoperative frailty informs patient and family discussions and
decision-making regarding surgical techniques and alternative
treatments, postoperative recovery strategies, and expected outcomes.
The prognosis of frail patients improves with shared decision-making,
prehabilitation, and interdisciplinary geriatric co-management \[14\].

Malnutrition Preoperative malnutrition leads to immune system
dysfunction and contributes to several adverse surgical outcomes,
including increased susceptibility to wound infection, cognitive
dysfunction, and poor wound healing. Patients with preoperative
hypoalbuminemia, either alone or associated with chronic liver disease
or congestive heart failure, are more likely to have postoperative
complications such as infections, organ dysfunction, increased duration
of mechanical ventilation and ICU stay, and mortality. BMI is not an
accurate assessment of nutritional status. Various screening tools exist
to identify malnutrition preoperatively. The Nestlé Mini Nutritional
Assessment Short Form (MNA-SF) is a validated screening tool which
evaluates predictive parameters such as recent oral intake, weight loss,
mobility, psychological stress, and neuropsychological

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

15

problems, in addition to BMI or calf circumference. The sensitivity and
speciﬁcity of the MNA-SF is 97.9% and 100%, with a diagnostic accuracy
of 99% for predicting undernutrition \[15\]. The MNA-SF is easy to use
and eﬃcient, and minimally impacts workﬂow. A numerical score identiﬁes
patients as malnourished, at risk of malnutrition, or of normal
nutritional status. Preoperative nutritional optimization includes
supplementation with protein or immunonutrient solutions containing
arginine and omega fatty acids. Beneﬁts of preoperative dietary
supplementation include reduced hospital stays, reduced need for
critical care, and reduced postoperative infections, including pulmonary
and surgical site infections in patients undergoing gastrointestinal
cancer surgery \[16\]. The Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS)
Society strongly encourages complex carbohydrate loading before surgery,
which reduces postoperative insulin resistance and length of stay.

Anemia Anemia is not merely an independent predictor of adverse
perioperative outcomes; it is a potent risk multiplier. The preoperative
presence of anemia augments the inherent mortality risk of coexisting
diseases, such as chronic kidney disease (CKD) and congestive heart
failure. Anemia is widespread in surgical patients, with a reported
incidence of up to 76%. Frequently, the anemia is undiagnosed.
Consequently, anemia identiﬁed on preoperative evaluation is often
ignored and accepted as a harmless deviation. Not only is anemia a
modiﬁable preoperative condition, but it is also associated with
decreased survival and higher rates of hospitalization, and is one of
the strongest predictors of perioperative blood transfusions, an
individual risk proﬁle. A preoperative hemoglobin level &lt;6 g/dL
increases the risk of death at 30 days 26-fold, compared to a hemoglobin
level of 12 g/dL \[17\]. Iron deﬁciency is the most common cause of
anemia and results from malabsorption or nutritional deﬁciency, or is
medication-related. Oral iron supplementation initiated 4–6 weeks before
a scheduled surgery generally results in an increase in reticulocyte
count within 7–14 days and an increase in hemoglobin level of about 2
g/dL within 3 weeks. Patients who do not respond to oral iron or who are
noncompliant due to gastrointestinal disturbance are candidates for
intravenous iron therapy. Intravenous iron results in hemoglobin
increases of 0.5–1.0 g dL−1 per week. The use of erythrocytestimulating
factors concurrently with intravenous iron results in an even greater
response, but has an increased incidence of venous thromboembolism.
Other nutritional causes of anemia, such as vitamin B12 and folate
deﬁciencies, are easily correctable with over-the-counter
supplementation. Preoperative consultation with a hematologist helps
manage other identiﬁed forms of anemia, such

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

16

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns

as hemolytic or anemia of chronic inﬂammation. Intravenous iron
initiated after surgery does not reduce the incidence of a perioperative
blood transfusion but does reduce the 30-day transfusion incidence.

Cognitive Dysfunction Many geriatric patients present for surgery with
cognitive impairment predisposing them to preventable adverse outcomes,
such as delirium, falls, pneumonia, urinary tract infections, functional
decline, and increased mortality. Cognitive impairment describes a
patient’s current state, and usually presents as confusion, memory loss,
decreased attention, disorientation, and mood changes. Dementia and
delirium are the two most common forms of cognitive impairment, and
Table 1.5 diﬀerentiates one from the other. Patients with preexisting
dementia have an increased incidence of early postoperative mortality.
Approximately one-third of hospitalized elderly patients experience
delirium. Routine preoperative screening for cognitive impairment
identiﬁes atrisk patients and allows appropriate referral to a
neurologist or geriatric medicine specialist. The six-item screen, noted
in Table 1.6, is a brief screening tool for identifying patients with
cognitive impairment by testing attention, short-term memory, and
orientation. Its reliability is comparable to the full Mini-Mental State
Examination. A score of 2 or higher suggests cognitive impairment and
the need for further evaluation. Table 1.5 Characteristics of dementia
and delirium Dementia

Delirium

Duration

Chronic, progressive condition

Hours to weeks

Onset

Chronic onset

Acute onset

Attention

Generally normal

Impaired or ﬂuctuating

Memory

Long- and short-term memory impairment

Recent and immediate memory impairment

Alertness

Generally normal

Lethargic to hypervigilant

Thought pattern

Word-ﬁnding diﬃculty; poor judgment

Disorganized thinking; slow or accelerated thoughts

Source: Adapted from: Agency for Clinical Innovation 2018.
www.ausmed.com/cpd/arti cles/cognitive-impairment.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

17

Table 1.6 Six-item screen for cognitive impairment Did the patient
correctly answer the questions below?

Yes

No

Correct

Incorrect

What year is this?

0

1

What month is this?

0

1

What day of the week is this?

0

1

Apple

0

1

Table

0

1

Car

0

1

What were the three objects you were asked to remember?

Total

Diabetes An overwhelming quantity of literature establishes a clear
correlation between perioperative hyperglycemia and adverse surgical
outcomes, including increased surgical site infections and mortality.
The risk of postoperative complications and death is a function of both
long-term glycemic control and the short-term severity of hyperglycemia
on admission. Diabetic patients, particularly those requiring insulin
management, undergoing major vascular surgery have a higher incidence of
perioperative death and cardiovascular complications. Neither diabetes
managed with insulin nor that managed with oral medications
independently predicts mortality. Signiﬁcant risk factors for death
include several diabetes comorbidities, such as proteinuria, elevated
creatinine level, history of congestive heart failure, and stroke. After
adjusting for comorbidities, diabetic patients have a 38% or higher
increase in hospital length of stay \[18\]. Preoperative risk
stratiﬁcation involves a basic metabolic panel within 6 months of the
scheduled surgery, or more recent, depending on patient status. A
hemoglobin A1c (Hgb A1c) level indicates long-term glucose control over
the preceding 2–3 months, but there is no clear delineation of the level
above which elective surgery should not occur. The ability of a
preoperative Hgb A1c to predict surgical site infections remains
controversial, but many orthopedic departments utilize a 7.0–8.5% range,
above which elective surgery is delayed. Fructosamine levels are an
alternative to Hgb A1c and provide an indication of glucose control over
the past 2–3 weeks. Some

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

18

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns

literature suggests that fructosamine levels are a more signiﬁcant
predictor of adverse outcomes in orthopedic surgery than Hgb A1c.
Fructosamine is useful for assessing glucose control in conditions where
Hgb A1c is unreliable, such as endstage renal disease (ESRD) and chronic
hemolytic anemia.

Chronic Kidney Disease The preoperative management of the spectrum of
CKD, further detailed in Table 1.7, requires consideration of the
disease process and comorbidities, such as cardiovascular dysfunction,
anemia, and electrolyte disorders. These coexisting diseases confer
signiﬁcant perioperative risk. Of primary concern is the independent
association with underlying coronary artery disease. Objective
assessment of functional capacity with DASI and adherence to the
American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)
perioperative guidelines aid in risk assessment. ACEIs, angiotensin
receptor blockers (ARBs), and diuretics are customarily held before
surgery unless indicated for heart failure or volume Table 1.7 Stages of
chronic kidney disease Stage of chronic kidney disease

Signs and symptoms

Percentage of normal kidney function (estimated GFR)

1

No symptoms, but coexisting disease present (diabetes, hypertension,
obesity)

≥90% (normal or increased GFR)

2

No symptoms, but proteinuria present

60–89% (mildly reduced GFR)

3

Edema, fatigue, microalbuminuria, back pain

30–59% (moderately reduced GFR)

4

Stage 3 symptoms plus nausea, vomiting, neuropathy, and loss of appetite

15–29% (severely reduced GFR)

5

Stage 4 symptoms plus fatigue, weakness, anemia, thirst, cramps, skin
discoloration, little to no urine output, and easy bruising/ bleeding

&lt;15% (kidney failure; dialysis dependent)

GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Preoperative Evaluation and Coexisting Disease

19

overload. All other cardiovascular medications should continue as usual.
ESRD patients have a high incidence of coexisting structural heart
disease, and both right and left ventricular dysfunction are associated
with poor outcomes and death. An echocardiogram obtained within the
previous year is useful for risk stratiﬁcation. Despite a high
prevalence of coronary artery disease, many CKD patients are
asymptomatic and have adequate functional capacity. An objective
assessment of cardiac function, such as dobutamine stress
echocardiography, identiﬁes undiagnosed cardiovascular disease and
allows for preoperative risk mitigation. CKD is associated with excess
surgical morbidity, including acute renal failure, hyperkalemia, volume
overload, and infections. Patients with ESRD have an adjusted all-cause
mortality rate at least 10-fold higher than that of nonESRD patients.
Decreased renal production of erythropoietin leads to anemia. The
National Kidney Foundation suggests optimizing preoperative hemoglobin
level to 11–12 g dL−1 with oral or intravenous iron and
erythropoietin-stimulating agents. Hemodialysis, preferably on the day
before surgery, corrects electrolyte abnormalities and platelet
dysfunction. While there is no established upper limit for hyperkalemia,
with diﬀerences in institutional policy and patient tolerance, a
preoperative basic or comprehensive metabolic proﬁle detects potassium
and other electrolyte abnormalities.

Summary and Conclusion Preoperative evaluation and optimization are an
opportunity for anesthesia providers to enhance patient safety and
outcomes and to create value in healthcare through the identiﬁcation,
risk stratiﬁcation, and mitigation of modiﬁable risk factors. A
systems-based, collaborative approach and application of high-yield
preoperative interventions on modiﬁable risk factors integrate the
quadruple aim of improved outcomes, improved clinical and patient
experiences, and reduction in healthcare costs.

Review Questions 1. Which New York Heart Association (NYHA) class is
assigned a patient with a history of heart failure who has slight
limitation of physical activity and is comfortable at rest, but
experiences dyspnea, palpitations, or fatigue with ordinary physical
activity? (a) Class I (b) Class II (c) Class III (d) Class IV

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

20

Matthew Sherrer, Sher-Lu Pai, and Jeﬀrey Dobyns

2.  Which of the following is a risk prediction tool commonly used to
    identify patients at risk of postoperative pulmonary complications?

<!-- -->

(a) Six-item screen
(b) NSQIP surgical risk calculator
(c) ARISCAT Risk Index
(d) FRAIL scale

<!-- -->

3.  Which of the following is a patient risk factor for the development
    of postoperative pulmonary complications?

<!-- -->

(a) Poor functional capacity/frailty
(b) Emergency surgical procedure
(c) Surgery lasting &gt;2 hours
(d) Receipt of a perioperative blood transfusion

<!-- -->

4.  Which of the following laboratory tests is useful for assessing
    glycemic control over the preceding 2–3 weeks in end-stage renal
    disease (ESRD) patients?

<!-- -->

(a) Hemoglobin A1c
(b) Comprehensive metabolic proﬁle
(c) Fructosamine
(d) Phenylpropanolamine

Answers 1 (b) A patient with a history of heart failure who experiences
slight limitation of physical activity with dyspnea, palpitations, or
fatigue on ordinary activity is assigned NYHA class II. 2 (c) The
ARISCAT Risk Index is a risk prediction tool used to identify patients
at risk of postoperative pulmonary complications and to guide
perioperative optimization strategies. 3 (a) Poor functional
capacity/frailty is a patient risk factor for postoperative pulmonary
complications. The other choices are surgical risk factors. 4 (c)
Fructosamine levels assess glycemic control over the preceding 2–3
weeks, whereas hemoglobin A1c assesses glycemic control over the
previous 2– 3 months. Fructosamine levels give a more reliable
estimation in patients with conditions such as ESRD and chronic
hemolytic anemia.

References 1. Gupta S, Fernandes RJ, Rao JS, Dhanpal R. Perioperative
risk factors for pulmonary complications after non-cardiac surgery. J
Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol. 2020;36 (1):88–93.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.002 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

2

Airway Management Chikezie N. Okeagu, Madelyn K. Craig, Brook Girma,
Sumitra Miriyala, Meeta M. Sheth, Sridhar R. Tirumala, Rhian E. Germany,
and Alan David Kaye

Introduction Airway management is a vital component of administering
anesthesia, allowing for the exchange of gases between the patient and
the surrounding atmosphere. Diﬃcult or unsuccessful management of the
airway is a signiﬁcant source of anesthesia-related morbidity and
mortality \[1\]. As such, it is important for anesthesia providers to be
adept at all aspects of managing the airway. A thorough understanding of
the pertinent anatomy and physiology, the ability to use clinical
evaluation to identify potential diﬃculties, and a mastery of
interventional techniques and procedures are crucial to safe and
eﬀective airway management. This chapter presents a comprehensive
overview of the elements related to eﬀective airway management.

Airway Anatomy Respiration is a complex process that involves the
exchange of gases and the breakdown of glucose to yield energy \[1\].
Understanding the anatomy of the airway is important when performing
intubation. The airway can be divided into multiple subsections: the
nasal cavity, oral cavity, and pharynx. The pharynx is further divided
into the nasopharynx, oral pharynx, and hypopharynx, running from
superior to inferior. The nasal cavity consists of the nares, septum,
and turbinates (superior, middle, and cheap). It is bound superiorly by
the ethmoid bone. It is continuous posteriorly with the nasopharynx (the
most prominent portion of the pharynx). The oral cavity consists of the
upper/ lower rows of teeth, the tongue, hard palate, and soft palate,
and is continuous posteriorly with the oropharynx. The oropharynx
stretches down to the epiglottis (the cartilaginous structure that
serves as a ﬂap to cover the trachea or esophagus). The hypopharynx runs
from the epiglottis down to the superior edge of the trachea. This is
the region where the vocal cords will be visualized (along with the
larynx region). These lie at around the level of the thyroid cartilage.
Breathing, or ventilation, is the process of conducting air to and from
the lungs. Simultaneously, gaseous exchange is the diﬀusion of oxygen 23

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

24

C. N. Okeagu, M. K. Craig, B. Girma, et al.

into the blood vessels and the removal of carbon dioxide and other gases
into the air \[2\]. The respiratory tract organs form a continuous
passage for air, and they are divided into upper and lower airways. The
lower airways include the trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and alveoli.
Their primary function is to facilitate the movement of air between the
lungs and the atmosphere. The trachea is a hollow tube supported by
cartilage. It begins from the larynx and branches into the bronchi. The
cartilage helps to ensure that it does not collapse or overexpand. The
bronchi branch from the trachea and subdivide into bronchioles. They
serve as passages for bringing air in and out of the lungs. Unlike the
trachea and bronchi, the bronchioles do not have cartilage and their
diameter is much smaller \[3\]. They are ciliated and have a simple
epithelium with mucus-secreting cells. The ﬁnal portion of the lower
airway is made of the alveoli, single-cell layered and near the
capillaries. They facilitate the actual exchange of gases in the lungs.
The general function of the airway is to allow for airﬂow to facilitate
gaseous exchange, which is essential for respiration. However, they
perform other functions to maintain adequate protection and homeostasis.
They serve as moisture barriers to prevent loss of excessive moisture
through humidiﬁcation of air. They work as temperature barriers by
warming the air from the environment as it gets into the airways.
Finally, they work as barriers to infection, primarily through the
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). From the base of the trachea,
the airways branch into the right and left sides. Two bronchi further
divide into lobar (secondary) bronchi, which in turn divide into
segmental (tertiary) bronchi that eventually form the bronchioles \[4\].
The right- and left-sided airways connect to the respective lungs. The
branching of the airways into the left and right sides forms an
extensive pulmonary tree. The right lung is broader and shorter, whereas
the left lung is thinner and longer. The reason why the right lung is
shorter is because the liver rests beneath it. On the other hand, the
left lung has to make room for the heart, hence is narrower. The right
lung refers to the right side of the pair of lungs at the front of the
thoracic cavity, whereas the left side is known as the left lung. One of
the key diﬀerences is the number of lobes, with the right lung having
three (superior, middle, and inferior). By contrast, the left lung has
only two lobes (upper and lower). There is a thick cardiac notch at the
left lung, making it distinct, although it does not serve any role in
the right lung. Finally, the left lung has a horizontal and an oblique
ﬁssure, whereas the left has only the oblique ﬁssure. These diﬀerent
upper airway areas are innervated diﬀerently by branches and terminal
ends of some cranial nerves. The primary nerves that give sensation to
the airway are the trigeminal nerve (CN V), the glossopharyngeal nerve
(CN IX), and the vagus nerve (CN X). The trigeminal nerve is almost
exclusively a cranial sensory nerve and gives oﬀ three main branches:
ophthalmic (V1), maxillary (V2), and mandibular (V3). The ophthalmic

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Airway Management

25

nerve and its smaller branches provide sensory innervation to the
superior region of the internal nasal cavity. Many internal components
supply the medial and lateral parts of the ethmoidal area and the
superior nares. The maxillary nerve provides sensory innervation to the
inferior nasal region, nasal septum, and soft palate in the oral cavity.
It also provides some innervation to the external nasal area via the
infraorbital nerve (one of the terminal branches of the maxillary
nerve). The pterygopalatine ganglion lies in between the palatine and
maxilla bones, receives ﬁbers from the maxillary nerve, and then sends
smaller components out (nasopalatine, greater/lesser palatine, etc.).
Remember, the nasopalatine nerve comes from the pterygopalatine
ganglion, runs along inside the nasal septum mucosa, dives through the
incisive canal, and terminates in the anterior hard palate. Finally, the
mandibular nerve gives sensation to the anterior two-thirds via the
lingual nerve \[5\]. The posterior one-third of the tongue and posterior
pharyngeal mucosa (down to the aryepiglottic fold level) receive sensory
innervation from the glossopharyngeal nerve. This nerve also provides
ﬁbers to the dense pharyngeal nerve plexus, which innervates the
palatopharyngeal arch. The pharyngeal nerve plexus receives some
glossopharyngeal nerve ﬁbers. However, the plexus is mainly made up of
motor ﬁbers from the vagus nerve. The vagus nerve mediates sensory
innervation to the larynx and laryngopharynx, and gives rise to the
superior laryngeal nerve. The superior laryngeal nerve branches into the
internal and external. The inner laryngeal nerves provide sensory
innervation to the epiglottic region’s mucosa, extending to the level of
the vocal folds. Below the vocal folds, sensory and motor innervation is
supplied by the left and right recurrent laryngeal nerves (also branches
of the vagus). Therefore, they innervate all the larynx’s intrinsic
muscles (sparing the cricothyroid muscle, which is innervated by the
external laryngeal nerve). All of these innervations are important for
airway management when performing intubation because the endotracheal
(ET) tube will pass through most, if not all, of these regions to end up
in the trachea to provide oxygenation to the lungs \[5\]. During routine
intubation, the blade should move the patient’s tongue out of the visual
ﬁeld to directly see the vocal cords. The vocal cords are the most
medial. They connect to the cricoid cartilage anteriorly, and
posteriorly to the arytenoid cartilage on the larynx’s posterior edge.
Visualization of the ET tube moving midline through the cords should
give successful intubation. The ET tube was kept in place just superior
to the carina level (e.g., bifurcation of the trachea into the two
primary bronchi). Although adult and pediatric patients have all of the
same airway structures, there can be diﬀerences in length, size, and
width. In pediatric patients, note the prominent occiput will cause neck
ﬂexion in the supine position, so a towel should be placed under the
shoulders to keep a direct airway ready for intubation. The hypopharynx
will also be

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

26

C. N. Okeagu, M. K. Craig, B. Girma, et al.

shorter and narrower than in an adult – the cricoid cartilage resting
higher at the C4 vertebra (the adult cricoid cartilage is at C6).
Additionally, the pediatric vocal cords are not at a 90-degree angle to
the larynx wall as the adult vocal cords are. The pediatric cords slope
downwards anteriorly, providing diﬃculty with the tube rubbing against
the cords and possibly causing trauma. Lastly, the epiglottis in a
pediatric patient is not as ﬂat as in an adult, presenting problems with
using a Macintosh blade instead of a Miller blade. Some physicians
prefer the Miller blade during pediatric intubation because it has a
better shape to move the pediatric epiglottis out of the visual ﬁeld,
compared to a curved Macintosh blade \[5\].

Airway Assessment Airway Assessment A thorough assessment of the
patient’s airway should be conducted in the preoperative setting. This
consists of obtaining a history of any previous airway instrumentation,
reviewing the patient’s medical record, with particular attention to
previous anesthesia and/or intubations, and noting any disease states
that may have implications on airway management. Typically, patients who
have presented diﬃculties with airway management have been informed of
this and/or documentation of such can be found in the patient’s medical
record. The medical record may also contain information regarding which
techniques were used in order to successfully manage the airway \[6\]. A
comprehensive history should be accompanied by a physical examination,
with the aim of identifying features that may portend diﬃculty with
airway management. Examination of the mouth opening, dentition,
oropharyngeal space, submandibular compliance, cervical spine mobility,
and body habitus can all help stratify the risk of diﬃcult airway
management, and several tools exist to assist in this assessment. The
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of any single one of these tools are low.
However, when used in combination, they can be helpful in predicting
which patients may present diﬃculty in airway management. The Mallampati
test is used to evaluate the oropharyngeal space. It consists of visual
examination of the oropharyngeal space. A “Mallampati score” is derived
based upon which structures are visible in the patient’s mouth. To
properly administer the test, the observer should be at eye level, with
the patient holding the head in a neutral position, opening the mouth
maximally, and protruding the tongue without phonating. The Mallampati
classiﬁcation is as follows: • I: The soft palate, fauces, uvula, and
tonsillar pillars are visible. • II: The soft palate, fauces, and uvula
are visible.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Airway Management

27

• III: The soft palate and base of the uvula are visible. • IV: The soft
palate is not visible \[6\]. The mnemonic PUSH (tonsillar Pillars,
Uvula, Soft palate, Hard palate) is often used to remember the
Mallampati score. A patient with a Mallampati score of I has all four
elements of PUSH visible on examination, whereas a patient with a
Mallampati score of IV has only the hard palate visible. A Mallampati
score of III or IV correlates with diﬃcult laryngoscopy. Mouth opening
is assessed by measurement of the interincisor distance – that is, the
distance between the upper and lower incisors. An interincisor distance
of &lt;3–4.5 cm correlates with diﬃcult laryngoscopy. Patients with
overbites have a reduced eﬀective interincisor distance and therefore
may present diﬃculties with laryngoscopy. The upper lip bite test (ULBT)
is also used to predict ease of laryngoscopy and intubation. The ULBT
assesses an individual’s mandibular prognathic ability. The ULBT is
broken down into three classes. Patients who fall in Class III of the
ULBT may present diﬃculty with laryngoscopy and intubation: • Class I:
The lower incisors can bite above the vermilion border of the upper lip.
• Class II: The lower incisors cannot reach the vermilion border. •
Class III: The lower incisors cannot bite the upper lip. As the soft
tissues of the pharynx are displaced into the submandibular space during
laryngoscopy, anything that limits the size or compliance of the
submandibular space can make laryngoscopy and intubation more
challenging. The thyromental distance, which is the distance between the
tip of the jaw and the thyroid cartilage, can also be informative. A
distance less than three ﬁngerbreadths or of 6–7 cm correlates with
diﬃcult laryngoscopy. Diﬃculty with neck extension and certain physical
features, such as obesity and increased neck circumference, also
indicate a potential diﬃcult airway \[6\].

Predictors of Diﬃcult Intubation/Ventilation The purpose of conducting a
thorough preoperative history and physical examination is to identify
patients with potential diﬃcult airways and formulate a plan for
successful management. The unanticipated diﬃcult airway must be avoided
at all costs. A number of congenital and acquired conditions are
associated with diﬃcult airway management. Table 2.1 outlines factors
that are associated with diﬃcult ventilation and/or intubation. It
should be noted that factors that are associated with diﬃcult intubation
are not always also associated with diﬃcult ventilation. The reverse is
also true.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

28

C. N. Okeagu, M. K. Craig, B. Girma, et al. Table 2.1 Factors associated
with diﬃcult ventilation and intubation Predictors of diﬃcult
ventilation

Predictors of diﬃcult intubation

Edentulous

History of diﬃcult intubation

History of snoring

Prognathic inability

Macroglossia

Limited neck range of motion

Micrognathia

Long incisors

Uvula not visible

Mallampati class III or IV

Obesity

Mandibular space stiﬀ, indurated, or occupied

Obstructive sleep apnea

Mouth opening &lt;3–4 cm

Presence of beard

Uvula not visible

Short neck

Obesity

Thick neck

Prominent overbite Thyromental distance &lt;6 cm Short neck Thick neck

Physiology of Airway Management Preoxygenation Prior to any intubation,
it is important to practice clinical fundamentals of management of the
airway with preoxygenation. If possible, preoxygenation with oxygen via
face mask should be initiated prior to all airway management
interventions or anesthetic induction. Nitrogen makes up about 80% of
the concentration in the lung. During preoxygenation, or
denitrogenation, the functional residual capacity (FRC) is purged of
nitrogen and ﬁlled with oxygen, increasing the duration of apnea without
desaturation. The four maximal breath technique of preoxygenation was
found to be associated with a statistically signiﬁcant shorter time to
onset of oxygen desaturation of blood, when compared to normal breathing
of 100% oxygen for 3 minutes \[7\]. A healthy patient breathing room air
will experience desaturation of &lt;90%, with apnea within 1–2 minutes
versus up to 8 minutes following preoxygenation. Goals for
preoxygenation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Airway Management

29

include: bringing the patient’s saturation as close to 100% as possible;
denitrogenating the residual capacity of the lungs (maximizing oxygen
storage in the lungs); and denitrogenating and maximally oxygenating the
bloodstream \[8\]. Utilizing this technique to achieve the goals
mentioned will increase the duration of safe apnea, as oxygen is poorly
soluble, and can provide preferable conditions for intubation.

Apneic Preoxygenation The process by which gases are entrained into the
alveolar space during apnea is referred to as apneic preoxygenation.
Since oxygen enters blood from the alveoli at a faster rate than carbon
dioxide leaving blood, a negative pressure is generated in the alveolus,
driving oxygen into the lungs. This method extends the duration of safe
apnea after the use of sedatives and muscle relaxants.

Airway Reﬂexes Laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation directly stimulate
airway reﬂexes that may elicit protective responses to this stimulation,
leading to hypertension and tachycardia. This is commonly seen in a
pediatric setting or “light” planes of anesthesia. In the larynx,
glottic stimulation, innervated by the superior laryngeal nerve, causes
closure of the distal airways, leading to glottic closure to prevent
aspiration. When exaggerated, this response can lead to complete glottic
closure, and consequently impending respiratory collapse. If
laryngospasm occurs and persists, positive pressure ventilation or small
doses of succinylcholine may be required to abate this response.
However, in certain cases, the spasm is sustained as long as the
stimulus continues, and morbidity, such as cardiac arrest, arrhythmia,
pulmonary edema, bronchospasm, or gastric aspiration, may occur \[9\].
Bronchospasm, a reﬂex more commonly seen in asthmatics, tends to also
occur in pediatric patients and those under “light” planes of
anesthesia. This response may also be an indicator of bronchial
intubation. Aside from respiratory reﬂexes, intubation may cause an
increase in intracranial or intraocular pressure, primarily due to a
sympathetic surge.

Aspiration Risk and Ways to Minimize the Risk Intraoperative pulmonary
aspiration, a rare anesthesia-related complication, is associated with
potentially fatal complications with signiﬁcant associated morbidity.
Awareness of the risk factors, predisposing conditions, maneuvers to
decrease risk, and immediate management options by both the surgeon and
the anesthesia team is imperative to reducing risk and optimizing
patient outcomes associated with acute intraoperative pulmonary
aspiration \[10\].

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

30

C. N. Okeagu, M. K. Craig, B. Girma, et al.

Risk factors include, but are not limited to: obesity; medications that
reduce lower esophageal tone; gastrointestinal (GI) obstruction; need
for emergency surgery; nasogastric tube placement; meal within 8 hours
prior to surgery; previous esophageal surgery; lack of coordination of
swallowing or respiration; esophageal cancer; hiatal hernia; patient
positioning; and provider factors. Assessing preoperative risk factors
may assist in planning preventative measures and minimize the risk of
intraoperative pulmonary aspiration. The ﬁrst step in successful
management of an intraoperative aspiration is immediate recognition of
gastric content in the oropharynx or airways \[10\]. Signs of aspiration
include persistent hypoxia, high airway pressures, bronchospasm, and
abnormal breath sounds following intubation. It is important to suction
the airway prior to positive pressure ventilation and to position the
patient with the head down and rotated laterally if possible. If the
patient is not intubated, it is recommended that the airway be secured
as rapidly as possible to prevent further aspiration and facilitate
airway clearance.

Airway Management Techniques Mask Ventilation Mask ventilation is
fundamental to the practice of anesthesia. This most basic skill is one
of the most important tools in airway management. It is performed prior
to ET intubation and used as a rescue maneuver if intubation is diﬃcult
or fails. Obtaining a tight seal with the face mask is an important
aspect of successful mask ventilation. The face mask should ﬁt over the
bridge of the nose and enclose the mouth, with the bottom positioned
between the lower lip and the chin. Leaks may develop if the mask is not
of the correct size, the cushion is improperly inﬂated, or the patient
has a beard or an abnormal anatomy. Risk factors for diﬃcult mask
ventilation include presence of a beard, increased body mass index
(BMI), edentulousness, limited mandibular protrusion, Mallampati score
III or IV, history of snoring or obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), airway
masses or tumors, history of neck radiation, male gender, and age
&gt;55. In order to maximize pharyngeal patency, the triple maneuver
(jaw thrust, head extension, and chin lift) should be used. Once the
triple maneuver is performed, the left hand holds this position, with
the mask sealed tightly to the face, while the right hand squeezes the
reservoir bag. If maintaining the triple maneuver position or an
adequate seal with one hand proves diﬃcult, the two-handed mask
ventilation technique should be utilized and a second provider assists
ventilation with the bag. An oral or nasal airway may be required to
overcome obstruction resulting from the tongue falling back to the
posterior pharyngeal wall. It is important to note that using an oral
airway may elicit a gag reﬂex or cause laryngospasm if the depth of
anesthesia is inadequate. A nasal airway is better tolerated in these
situations. Ventilating

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Airway Management

31

pressure should not exceed 20 cmH2O to avoid gastric distension,
regurgitation, and aspiration. If mask ventilation proves diﬃcult or
impossible, alternative strategies to ventilate the patient must be
attempted, such as intubation or placement of a supraglottic airway
\[11, 12\].

Supraglottic Airways Supraglottic airway (SGA) devices are an
alternative method to mask ventilation and ET intubation, and have made
their way into the diﬃcult airway algorithm with their ease of use and
rescue ventilation ability. Quick placement, less sympathetic
stimulation, avoidance of neuromuscular blockers, and maintenance of
spontaneous ventilation are a few advantages of using SGAs over ET
tubes. SGAs may be used as primary airway devices for selected patients
and surgeries, in emergency situations in and out of the hospital, to
facilitate ET intubation, and most importantly for airway rescue in the
unableto-ventilate-or-intubate situation. Nonfasting status, morbid
obesity, and pregnancy are contraindications for laryngeal mask airway
(LMA) use as the primary airway. OSA, gastro-esophageal reﬂux disease
(GERD), gastroparesis, and position other than supine are factors that
increase the risk of complications when using SGAs \[13\]. The LMA
Classic, one of the ﬁrst SGAs, is a reusable device made of silicone. A
disposable, single-use version of the LMA Classic is the LMA Unique.
Designed for intraoral procedures, the LMA Flexible has a wirereinforced
shaft to allow ﬂexible positioning away from the surgical site. The LMA
Fastrach, an intubating LMA, has a rigid, curved shaft and handle that
facilitates placement of an ET tube through its ventilating tube, with
or without the assistance of a ﬁberoptic scope. The reusable LMA ProSeal
was the ﬁrst LMA designed with a drainage tube to reduce the risk of
aspiration. This drainage tube also facilitates placement of an
orogastric tube. The LMA ProSeal’s design creates an improved airway
seal without adding pressure to the oropharyngeal tissue. A disposable
alternative to the LMA ProSeal is the LMA Supreme. In addition to the
gastric drainage tube, such as the LMA ProSeal, the LMA Supreme has a
curved shaft similar to the LMA Fastrach. The LMA Classic Excel is an
intubating version of the LMA Classic. The AirQ (disposable) and
Intubating Laryngeal Airway (reusable) were designed with unique
features to assist ET intubation but may also be used as a primary
airway. The Cobra Perilaryngeal Airway (PLA) diﬀers from the previously
discussed SGAs with its high-volume, low-pressure pharyngeal cuﬀ that
sits just proximal to the cuﬄess mask. It also allows passage of an ETT.
The Gnana Laryngeal Airway, a novel SGA device, is similar to the LMA
Classic in basic design, but with an additional suction port on the
convex portion of the laryngeal mask to remove saliva. The
Esophageal-Tracheal Combitube and the King Laryngeal Tube have been
designed to be able to achieve ventilation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

32

C. N. Okeagu, M. K. Craig, B. Girma, et al.

after blind insertion, making them useful for prehospital use or by
unskilled operators. Their double cuﬀ design allows ventilation via the
larynx by inﬂating the distal cuﬀ in the esophagus and the proximal cuﬀ
in the hypopharynx. The uniquely designed I-GEL device uses a cuﬄess
mask made of a gel material that conforms to the larynx. It also has a
gastric drainage tube that allows passage of an orogastric tube \[14\].

Endotracheal Intubation ET intubation is achieved with an ET tube via an
orotracheal or nasotracheal approach. There are several types of ET
tubes used to achieve ET intubation. The standard cuﬀed ET tube is
single lumen and comes in a variety of sizes, based on the internal
diameter of the tube. Specialty single-lumen tubes include oral and
nasal Ring–Adair–Elwyn (RAE) tubes, wire-reinforced tubes,
laser-resistant tubes, and electromyogram (EMG) tubes. Oral and nasal
RAE tubes have a preformed bend to allow positioning of the tube and
circuit away from the surgical ﬁeld for facial, oral, or dental
surgeries or neurosurgeries. Wire-reinforced tubes contain a metal wire
that is spiraled along its length to minimize kinking or allow
positioning away from the surgical ﬁeld. Laser-resistant tubes are used
during laser surgery of the upper airway to decrease the risk of airway
ﬁre. EMG monitoring tubes, such as the neural integrity monitor (NIM)
tube, allow monitoring of the recurrent laryngeal nerve during thyroid
and other neck surgeries \[15, 16\]. Several techniques are available
for ET intubation. Orotracheal intubation is most commonly performed via
direct laryngoscopy using a Macintosh (curved) or Miller (straight)
blade to directly visualize the glottic opening and insert the ET tube.
Indirect visualization using a video laryngoscope may be chosen for
patients with suspected diﬃcult airway or immobilization of the cervical
spine. Video laryngoscopes are categorized as either channeled or
nonchanneled. Nonchanneled videoscopes include the more commonly used
Glidescope, C-MAC, and McGrath. While these devices provide improved
glottic visualization, there can still be diﬃculty in directing the ET
tube into the glottis. Channeled videoscopes have a guide channel into
which the ET tube is preloaded and which directs the tube towards the
glottic opening. Airtraq and King Vision Video Laryngoscope are types of
channeled devices. A disadvantage of these devices is that the thicker
blades require a greater interincisor distance. Fiberoptic intubation is
another option for the management of a known or suspected diﬃcult
airway. It allows intubation in an awake patient; however, this
technique requires airway anesthesia. Nasotracheal intubation is
typically chosen for intraoral and mandibular surgeries. It can be
performed blindly, with the assistance of direct or video laryngoscopy
or a ﬁberoptic scope \[17, 18\]. Table 2.2 summarizes intubation
techniques and their indications and contraindications.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Airway Management

35

Management of Diﬃcult Airway Diﬃcult Airway Algorithm At present, there
is no standard deﬁnition that deﬁnes a diﬃcult airway. Rather, a diﬃcult
airway may be related to a clinical situation in which there is diﬃculty
with patient cooperation, diﬃculty ventilating, inability to visualize
any portion of the vocal cords after multiple attempts with direct
laryngoscopy, diﬃculty with ET intubation requiring multiple attempts,
or diﬃculty with surgical access. These complex situations place an
emphasis on the skills of the practitioner, as well as on careful
preoperative risk analysis to overcome the situation. Guidelines have
been created to provide a sequential series of plans to be used when
tracheal intubation fails and are designed to prioritize oxygenation
while limiting the number of airway interventions in order to minimize
trauma and complications \[20\]. A special task force was created by the
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) to evaluate several
published research studies from peer-reviewed journals and to reach a
consensus on the most eﬀective recommendations on approaches to manage a
diﬃcult airway once the primary plan fails, with the most updated
version seen in Figure 2.1. Basic preparation for diﬃcult airway
management includes: (1) availability of equipment for management of a
diﬃcult airway (i.e., portable storage unit); (2) informing the patient
with a known or suspected diﬃcult airway; (3) assigning an individual to
provide assistance when a diﬃcult airway is encountered; (4)
preanesthetic preoxygenation by mask; and (5) administration of
supplemental oxygen throughout the process of diﬃcult airway management
\[21\]. Noninvasive methods of intubation, also mentioned in the “Airway
Management Techniques” section, include: awake intubation;
video-assisted laryngoscopy; intubating stylets or tube changers; SGA
for ventilation or intubation; rigid laryngoscopic blades of varying
designs; ﬁberoptic-guided intubation; and lighted stylets.

Emergency Airway Procedures Cricothyrotomy As seen in the diﬃcult airway
algorithm, a cricothyrotomy may be invasive but can be a lifesaving
procedure once all approaches have been exhausted. Factors that indicate
this procedure include a patient who is diﬃcult to ventilate or
intubate, but also those with severe facial trauma or upper airway
bleeding or obstruction. Common techniques are the Seldinger or surgical
technique. The Seldinger technique involves locating the cricothyroid
membrane (CTM), puncturing the membrane with an 18-gauge wall needle,
and aspirating air once a pop is felt as the needle enters the trachea.
A guidewire is then advanced

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Airway Management

37

through the needle, followed by removal of the needle. A small incision
is made at the guidewire and a combined dilator and airway is placed.
Finally, the wire and dilator are removed, leaving the airway in place,
which is then secured with sutures. The surgical technique involves a
vertical and transverse incision. Once the anatomic landmarks of the
larynx and CTM are identiﬁed, a 3- to 4-cm midline vertical incision is
made, followed by a 1.5- to 2-cm horizontal incision at the inferior
third of the CTM. The resulting hole is enlarged with a dilator and a
cuﬀed tracheal cannula is inserted. Both techniques involve use of a
cuﬀed ET tube or cannula, which provides a bypass to upper airway
obstructions and provides ventilation and protection against aspiration.
Success of either technique is determined on the provider’s knowledge of
the anatomy and proﬁciency in technique and performing the procedure at
an appropriate time – early in a diﬃcult airway situation. Lack of
experience has been acknowledged as the main source of cricothyrotomy
failure, because practice opportunities of any kind are scarce \[22\].
Contraindications include laryngeal or tracheal disruption,
coagulopathies, and thyroid masses. Complications include: bleeding;
injury to the larynx, trachea, or esophagus; infection to the site; and
subglottic stenosis.

Transtracheal Jet Ventilation Percutaneous transtracheal jet ventilation
(PTTJV) is another invasive method which provides emergency ventilatory
support in patients who cannot be adequately ventilated with a face mask
or SGA, or are unable to be intubated. PTTJV can be achieved by placing
an over-the-needle catheter in the trachea through the CTM, which is
then connected to a syringe. The needle should be advanced at a
90-degree angle until air is aspirated, signifying the needle is in the
trachea. The catheter should then be advanced into the trachea at a 30-
to 45-degree angle caudally. After reconﬁrming proper placement, the
catheter is then connected to a high-pressure oxygen source with
specialized tubing that can accommodate at least 50 psi. Risks involved
with this procedure include pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, bleeding,
infection, and subcutaneous emphysema. Contraindications are upper
airway obstruction, disruption of the airway, and thyroid masses.

Extubation Extubation Criteria and Considerations Emergence from
anesthesia and extubation are critical points in anesthesia which, if
not performed appropriately, can be associated with an increased risk of
adverse events. A successful extubation is deﬁned as extubation without
the need for prompt intervention or reintubation. Prior to extubation,
the pharynx should be thoroughly suctioned to decrease the risk of
aspiration of blood

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

38

C. N. Okeagu, M. K. Craig, B. Girma, et al.

and/or secretions. The patient should also be ventilated with 100%
oxygen in case of complications preventing maintenance of the airway
following extubation. Most often, extubation is performed when the
patient is either deeply anesthetized or awake. In either case, recovery
from paralytics should be achieved and the patient should have a period
of spontaneous breathing with adequate tidal volumes before extubation
can occur. Commonly used criteria for awake extubation in children
include: eye opening; facial grimace; movement other than coughing;
purposeful movement; conjugate gaze; and end-tidal anesthetic
concentration below a predetermined level \[23\]. In adults, extubation
is traditionally based on global patient status. Global patient factors
consist of return of consciousness, ability to protect the airway,
normal body temperature, absence of residual neuromuscular blockade, and
normal metabolic parameters (e.g., absence of clinically signiﬁcant
anemia, acidosis, major electrolyte abnormality) \[24\]. Although many
criteria rely on patient status, an objective criterion that may assist
in determining whether a patient is ready for extubation is the negative
inspiratory force (NIF). The NIF is deﬁned as the maximum pressure that
can be generated against an occluded airway for 20 seconds from the FRC.
In this sense, it can be considered as a direct marker of inspiratory
muscle function and, in particular, of diaphragmatic force \[25\]. A NIF
≥−20 or −25 cmH2O is adequate to begin weaning and eventually extubating
a patient. Studies have shown that patients with a NIF &gt;−30 cmH2O
have a 90% or more chance of successful ventilation weaning and
extubation. In patients with diﬃcult intubations, extubation should be
carefully considered because reintubation can be more diﬃcult than the
initial intubation.

Complications Extubation during a light plane, especially during stage
2, is avoided due to an increased risk of laryngospasm, which is the
most common cause of airway obstruction after tracheal extubation. It is
precipitated by local irritation of the vocal cords by secretions or
blood, when the plane of anesthesia is insuﬃcient to prevent the
laryngospasm reﬂex, but too deep to allow coordinated cough \[26\].
Laryngospasm should be ﬁrst managed by administering 100% oxygen by
positive pressure ventilation until the patient awakens and laryngospasm
disappears. The provider may also deepen the plane of anesthesia by
using intravenous (IV) or inhalational anesthetics until laryngospasm
and airway reﬂexes are abolished. If this fails, it may be necessary to
utilize short-acting neuromuscular blocking agents, such as
succinylcholine, to enable oxygenation and, if required, reintubation.
Patients with prolonged, sustained laryngospasm may develop negative
pressure pulmonary edema. Extubating with an ET tube my also cause
coughing (bucking), which may lead to increased heart rate, blood
pressure, intracranial pressure, and abdominal pressure. If

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Airway Management

39

a patient begins to cough, this may also cause wound dehiscence and
increased bleeding. In asthmatics, there should be careful observation
during tracheal extubation as they are associated with a higher risk of
bronchospasm. Administering IV lidocaine 1–2 minutes before extubation
or extubating deep may mitigate coughing. Upper airway edema may also be
seen during extubation where patients develop stridor and respiratory
distress, typically within 6 hours of tracheal extubation. Those
patients in acute distress may require nebulized epinepherine in
combination with nebulized corticosteroids. The value of systemic
steroids is less clear, but IV dexamethasone at 0.25 mg kg−1,
immediately followed by 0.1 mg kg−1 every 6 hours for 24 hours has been
recommended. Other complications include trauma to the airway, tracheal
collapse, and vocal cord paralysis, which may be related to the
procedure performed.

References 1. Klinger K, Infosino A. Airway management. In: M Pardo, R
Miller, eds. Basics of Anesthesia, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier,
2018; pp. 239–72. 2. Ward JPT, Ward J, Leach RM. The Respiratory System
at a Glance, 3rd ed. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons; 2010. 3. Davies A,
Moores C. The Respiratory System, 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier; 2010. 4.
Ball M, Hossain M, Padalia D. Airway anatomy. In: StatPearls. Treasure
Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing; 2020. Available from:
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NB K459258/. 5. Bates JHT. Systems physiology
of the airways in health and obstructive pulmonary disease. Wiley
Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med. 2016;8(5):423–37. 6. Harless J, Ramaiah
R, Bhananker SM. Pediatric airway management. Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci.
2014;4(1):65–70. 7. Nimmagadda U, Salem MR, Crystal GJ. Preoxygenation:
physiologic basis, beneﬁts, and potential risks. Anesth Analg.
2017;124(2):507–17. 8. Weingart SD, Levitan RM. Preoxygenation and
prevention of desaturation during emergency airway management. Ann Emerg
Med. 2012;59(3):165–75.e1. 9. Alalami AA, Ayoub CM, Baraka AS.
Laryngospasm: review of diﬀerent prevention and treatment modalities.
Pediatr Anesth. 2008;18(4):281–8. 10. Nason KS. Acute intraoperative
pulmonary aspiration. Thorac Surg Clin. 2015;25 (3):301–7. 11. El-Orbany
M, Woehlck HJ. Diﬃcult mask ventilation. Anesth Analg. 2009;109
(6):1870–80. 12. Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Caplan RA, et al. Practice
guidelines for management of the diﬃcult airway: an updated report by
the American Society of

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.003 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

3

Anesthesia Equipment: Clinical Considerations George Mychaskiw, Eric Ly,
Austin Ly, Kelsey Rooney, Leah A. Kaplan, Stephen Patin, Victoria L.
Lassiegne, Katherine C. Babin, George Thomas, Elyse M. Cornett, and Alan
David Kaye

Introduction The anesthesia workstation, commonly referred to as the
“anesthesia machine,” is a complex and very specialized piece of
equipment that is relatively unique in medical practice. It is, in
essence, a device to control the delivery of medical gases to patients,
including oxygen, air, nitrous oxide, and volatile anesthetics, along
with a specialized ventilator adapted to operating room conditions. The
safe use of the anesthesia workstation requires proper training, preuse
checkout, and continuous monitoring of its function. The medical
literature is replete with examples of patient harm from inappropriate
use of the anesthesia workstation and from mechanical or electrical
failure of its components. Additionally, volatile anesthetics, while
valuable in medical practice, have a very low therapeutic index and
manifest severe, and even fatal, side eﬀects when administered
improperly. Finally, many patients under general anesthesia are
paralyzed for surgery and ventilated through an endotracheal tube. Their
safety is completely dependent on the anesthesia professional’s use of
the anesthesia workstation to deliver breathing gases, remove carbon
dioxide from exhaled gas, and precise administration of volatile
anesthetics. Obviously, mechanical or operator error can be catastrophic
and the design and functionality of the contemporary anesthesia
workstation represent an evolution of numerous safety features and
engineering to decrease the incidence of mechanical and human error.

Overview of Gas Flow from Pipeline and Cylinder Supply Gas Flow through
the Anesthesia Workstation The anesthesia workstation receives,
processes, and administers medical gases and volatile anesthetics. The
delivery of volatile anesthetics to the patient breathing circuit, which
connects to the patient’s airway, requires medical gases such as oxygen,
nitrous oxide, and air. The anesthesia workstation receives the gas
source from facility pipelines (e.g., intermediate pressure system) in
the walls that eventually link to the operating room and from 41

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

42

George Mychaskiw, Eric Ly, Austin Ly, et al.

cylinder inlets (e.g., high-pressure system) that attach to the
anesthesia workstation \[1, 2\]. The wall gas conduits in an operating
room are color-coded and ﬁtted via a speciﬁc tube diameter to the
workstation by gas type. Yellow represents air; green signiﬁes oxygen,
and blue denotes nitrous oxide. The diameter–index safety system (DISS)
provides gas-speciﬁc outlet fastening and helps prevent accidental gas
mixing and attachment. The required pipeline gas pressure supplied to
the workstation is around 50 psi \[3–5\]. Cylinders oﬀer gas supply if
the central source fails or is unavailable. Gas ﬂows through a fail-safe
device called a hanger–yoke assembly, which fastens to workstations and
ensures unidirectional ﬂow. The apparatus incorporates gas-speciﬁc pins
and holes (e.g., pin index safety system (PISS)), and gas travels past a
ﬁlter to prevent debris from accumulating in the cylinder and machine
\[3, 6\]. Gas cylinders also carry the same color-coded features to help
prevent inappropriate assembly and gas mixing. The high-pressure
cylinder gas then ﬂows through an initial pressure regulator, consisting
of a diaphragm and a spring, to form a reduced, constant pressure of
45–60 psi. For nitric oxide, gas ﬂows through a nitric oxide pressure
regulator and an additional valve, called the fail-safe valve, that
closes nitric oxide ﬂow when oxygen from the pipeline or cylinder
pressures reach low levels (&lt;20 psi) \[4\]. This helps to prevent a
hypoxic gas mixture, in the event of failure or depletion of oxygen
supply. For the intermediate-pressure system, the gas source facility
pipelines enter the gas ﬂow circuit immediately after bypassing the
initial pressure regulator, as the gas pressure is already reduced at
approximately 50 psi \[7\]. After nitric oxide and oxygen pass through
second-stage pressure regulators, both gases reach their respective ﬂow
control valves (e.g., needle valve), which control the rate of gas ﬂow
to the breathing circuit. Color-coded, speciﬁcally sized, and textured
ﬂow control knobs turn counterclockwise or clockwise to increase or
decrease the ﬂow rate, respectively. Gas enters ﬂowmeter glass tubes
where measurement of pressure occurs based on the principle that, among
other factors, ﬂow through a resistance (e.g., glass tube diameter)
corresponds to pressure \[3\]. The bobbin (e.g., ﬂoat or ball) within
the ﬂowmeter glass tube rises in height with increasing ﬂow and lowers
in height with decreasing ﬂow. Increasingly, medical gases in newer
systems are electronically metered into the breathing circuit and
animated ﬂowmeter tubes/displays are replacing glass tubes, with the
control dials mimicking the dials on older, mechanical systems.
Following ﬂow and pressure measurements, gases mix in a chamber called
the manifold at the top of the ﬂowmeter, according to speciﬁc sequences
in gas ﬂowmeters. Gas ﬂow exits the ﬂowmeter in a sequence that requires
oxygen ﬂowing out ﬁrst \[6\]. Arranging oxygen downstream reduces the
risk of hypoxic mixtures should a leak emerge from an upstream gas
ﬂowmeter tube. Again, this is true only in mechanical, nonelectronic
systems. Following gas mixing, gas travels to the common gas outlet and
breathing circuit \[8, 9\]. Table 3.1 describes a summary of the
pipeline supply gas ﬂow.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Anesthesia Equipment: Clinical Considerations

43

Table 3.1 Pipeline supply gas ﬂow Steps

Nitrous oxide pipeline

Oxygen pipeline

1

“Fail-safe” valve

2

Nitrous oxide/oxygen pressure regulator

3

Flow control valve

4

Flowmeter glass tube

5

Manifold

6

Common gas outlet

7

Breathing circuit

Overview of Air and Oxygen Flush Flow Air may also ﬂow through the
anesthesia workstation. Air can travel through the low-pressure circuit
(e.g., components after the ﬂowmeters) of the anesthesia workstation,
and it also encounters a secondary pressure regulator. Air may also ﬂow
to the ﬂowmeter assembly for measuring and ultimately delivery to the
breathing circuit and patient, even without suﬃcient oxygen pressure
present. A direct link from the ﬁrst oxygen pressure regulator to the
common gas outlet is an additional oxygen circuit within the anesthesia
workstation that a provider may use with the oxygen ﬂush button (e.g.,
valve). By circumventing the ﬂowmeter, manifold, and vaporizer, the
circuit ﬂows through an oxygen ﬂush regulator to deliver 100% oxygen and
supply an oxygen pressure starting from 50 psi \[10, 11\]. Functions of
the oxygen ﬂush button include diluting anesthetic gases or mixtures in
the breathing circuit with oxygen, inﬂating the patient breathing bag,
and supporting situations in which the patient requires high-ﬂow oxygen
at 35–75 L min−1, such as with mask ventilation \[4, 9\]. In newer,
fully electronic, and computerized gas delivery systems, there is a
mechanical backup/override that can provide oxygen to the breathing
circuit in the event of an electrical or software failure.

Overview of Volatile Anesthetic Gas Flow Volatile anesthetics enter the
anesthetic workstation gas ﬂow in the lowpressure system, which consists
of the components after the ﬂowmeters (e.g., vaporizers) and lies
slightly above atmospheric pressure. Injection and mixing of volatile
anesthetics with the combined gas ﬂow occur immediately after the
ﬂowmeters. Since volatile anesthetics exist as liquids in room

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

44

George Mychaskiw, Eric Ly, Austin Ly, et al.

temperature and atmospheric pressure (with the exception of desﬂurane),
vaporization, the transforming of liquid to vapor, must occur before
delivery to the common gas outlet and breathing circuit \[9, 12\]. Since
desﬂurane’s vapor pressure is close to atmospheric pressure, it must be
delivered through a specialized “vaporizer” that heats and pressurizes
its vapor, which is then electronically metered into the fresh gas ﬂow.
Modiﬁcations of the ﬂowmeters and vaporizers inﬂuence respective gas
compositions before gas ﬂows through the anesthetic workstation’s common
gas outlet, which attaches to the anesthetic breathing system (e.g.,
circuit) \[6\].

Overview of Anesthetic Breathing System Gas Flow The anesthetic
breathing system serves to distribute gases, including oxygen and
anesthetic gases, and remove carbon dioxide from the patient. Three
commonly used anesthetic breathing systems include the Mapleson F
(Jackson-Rees) system, Bain circuit, and circle system. Based on a
number of factors, classiﬁcations of anesthetic breathing systems
include open, semiopen, semi-closed, and closed \[13\]. The most
commonly utilized anesthetic breathing system is the circle system,
which employs an inspiratory and expiratory limb made up of tubular
arrangements to create a circular gas ﬂow. Gas ﬂows from the common gas
outlet to the inspiratory limb and travels through a series of tubular
extensions that include corrugated tubes, tracheal tube connectors, and
endotracheal tubes to reach the patient’s lung. On exhalation, gases,
including carbon dioxide generated by cellular respiration, ﬂow through
the expiratory limb to reach a carbon dioxide processor \[3, 12, 13\].
Gas ﬂows through a Y-piece, which connects the inspiratory and
expiratory limbs to the tracheal tube connector, on inhalation and
exhalation to complete the circular gas ﬂow. The design also includes
check valves to create unidirectional gas ﬂow through the inspiratory
and expiratory limbs. Some systems apply rebreathing of exhaled gases,
which function to reduce overall anesthetic use and maximize
humidiﬁcation of inhaled gases \[12\].

Workstation Components Gas Inlets and Safety Systems Anesthesia machines
typically have multiple gas inlets, with pressure gauges for each inlet
\[14\]. Pipeline inlets are those that supply gas from pipelines that
run throughout the healthcare facility \[14\]. These inlets usually
provide oxygen and nitrous oxide from the facility’s central supply
\[14\]. The pipeline inlets utilize tubing that connects to the
anesthesia machine via a noninterchangeable DISS ﬁtting that mitigates
the risk of incorrect hose attachment \[14\]. A second gas inlet
provides gas from a secondary source

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Anesthesia Equipment: Clinical Considerations

45

stored as either compressed gas (air, oxygen, helium) or liqueﬁed under
pressure (nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide) in the cylinders \[14\]. This
gas supply is typically used as a backup supply if the primary pipeline
source were to fail \[15\]. A hanger–yoke assembly attaches these gas
cylinders to the anesthesia machine by utilizing a PISS \[15\]. This
safety system is crucial in ensuring correct connection of gases when
needed. The yoke assembly safety system consists of index pins, a
washer, a gas ﬁlter, and a check valve \[15\]. The check valve prevents
retrograde gas ﬂow through the gas inlet back into the attached cylinder
\[15\]. To ensure additional safety, the cylinders are thoroughly
checked and tested by manufacturers regularly to ensure the safety of
both patients and healthcare professionals operating the machinery
\[14\]. There is also a consistent color-coded labeling system to safely
diﬀerentiate between the diﬀerent gases stored in these cylinders
\[14\].

Gauges and Sensors The pipeline inlet consistently provides gases to the
anesthesia machine at approximately 50 psig \[15\]. The pressure at
which a cylinder source provides gases is more variable but is usually
downregulated to approximately 45 psig \[15\].

Pressure Regulators While the pipeline gas supply maintains relatively
constant pressure, variable gas pressure in cylinders complicates ﬂow
control \[15\]. In order to utilize cylinder gas sources more safely,
anesthesia machines feature a pressure regulator that keeps the pressure
between 45 and 47 psig \[15\].

Oxygen Flush Valve The oxygen ﬂush valve provides additional safety to
the anesthesia machine by allowing high-ﬂow, high-pressure oxygen to ﬂow
directly from the source into the breathing circuit \[16\]. In this way,
oxygen bypasses the vaporizers and ﬂowmeters \[16\]. Malfunction of this
feature is rare but can cause signiﬁcant harm to the patient if this
occurs, resulting in barotraumas or intraanesthetic awareness \[16\].

Pressure Sensors, Fail-Safe, and Alarms When oxygen pipeline pressure
drops, a fail-safe device senses this drop and ensures that the set
oxygen concentration is maintained despite the loss of oxygen pressure
\[17\]. The fail-safe system maintains the oxygen concentration by
promptly shutting oﬀ the ﬂow of nitrous oxide \[17\]. The drop in
pressure of oxygen sets oﬀ both audible and visual alarms that draw
attention to the issue \[18\].

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

46

George Mychaskiw, Eric Ly, Austin Ly, et al.

Oxygen Ratio Proportioning Systems Most modern machines use a
proportioning safety device, in addition to the “fail-safe” pressure
threshold shutoﬀ valve \[19\]. Depending on the manufacturer of the
anesthesia machine, these devices either mechanically link the oxygen
and nitrous oxide ﬂow controls or reduce the ﬂow of nitrous oxide and
other gases via pressure feedback from the oxygen supply, so that the
proportion of nitrous oxide to oxygen results in a minimum oxygen
concentration at the common gas outlet of between 23% and 25% \[19\].

Fresh Gas Controllers and Flowmeters In a circle system, fresh gas ﬂow
is typically set to minute ventilation \[10\]. If fresh gas ﬂow exceeds
the patient’s alveolar minute ventilation, then the fresh gas will force
out the remaining exhaled alveolar gas in the breathing circuit before
the next inspiration \[10\]. If the exhaled carbon dioxide volume is
equal to or greater than the patient’s tidal volume, then the next
inspiration will only contain fresh gas \[10\]. Fresh gas decoupling is
an element in newer workstation models that prevents high volumes and
pressures from being transported to the patient during inspiration,
resulting in a more precise delivery of tidal volume \[20\]. Flowmeters
measure each individual gas before they mix together with other gases
and enter into the vaporizer \[20\]. As noted previously, the oxygen
ﬂowmeter is positioned the furthest downstream, which helps maintain ﬂow
to the patient in the event of an upstream leak \[20\]. Electronic ﬂow
meters are less likely to develop leaks and breakages since there are
fewer mechanical parts \[10\]. The electronic numerical display allows
for inspection of gas ﬂow even in a dimmed operating room, and data will
be electronically sent to an information system, making it an
advantageous choice for many surgeries and procedures \[10\].

Workstation Ventilators: Bellows versus Piston Traditionally, anesthesia
ventilator bellows are driven either pneumatically by oxygen or by
pressurized air \[10\]. Some newer ventilators use electronically driven
pistons to generate gas ﬂow and do not require oxygen or pressurized gas
consumption, an economical feature \[10\]. Ventilator bellows in
nonpiston machines can be ascending or descending, based on whether the
bellow ascends or descends during the inspiratory phase \[10\]. A
descending bellow is generally safer since it will not ﬁll during a
circuit leak \[10\]. An advantage of a piston ventilator is the ability
to deliver accurate tidal volumes to the patient, regardless of patient
size or poor lung compliance \[10\].

Vaporizers and Manifold Vaporizers are located between the ﬂowmeters and
the common gas outlet \[14\]. They receive gas ﬂow from the ﬂowmeter and
add a concentration-calibrated

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Anesthesia Equipment: Clinical Considerations

47

amount of volatile anesthetic agent to the gas \[14\]. Vaporizers are
temperaturecorrected for the speciﬁc anesthetic agent supplied, allowing
for the transport of a constant concentration of agent, irrespective of
temperature or ﬂow \[14\]. This temperature correction is signiﬁcant
because high temperatures cause increased amounts of gas to be
elaborated from the volatile, liquid state \[14\]. Oxygen enters the
manifold downstream to the other gases, which prevents hypoxia in case
there is a gas leak upstream \[14\]. Unidirectional valve malfunction
has occurred in older anesthesia machines because of condensation from
water vapor \[10\]. Condensation can be reduced by heating the manifold
and using water traps to collect the liquid \[10\].

Common Gas Outlet and Check Valve The common gas outlet is the single
connection between the vaporized volatile anesthetic and the patient’s
airway \[14\]. The common gas outlet supplies the tidal volume delivered
to the patient during inspiration \[14\]. Gas composition in the gas
outlet is aﬀected by diﬀerent elements, compared to gas composition in
the breathing circuit \[14\]. In the gas outlet, the composition of the
gas is aﬀected by alterations in ﬂowmeters and vaporizers \[14\].
Additionally, a oneway check valve is positioned between the vaporizers
and the oxygen ﬂush \[14\]. The purpose of the check valve is to prevent
retrograde gas ﬂow into the pipeline supplies, which can occur from
variations in positive pressure ventilation in older anesthesia machines
\[14\].

Waste Gas Scavenging Waste gas scavenging is important to the safety of
operating room personnel, as excess pollutants may lead to spontaneous
abortion, birth defects, and various organ system disorders \[21\].
Scavenging consists of collecting exhaled anesthetic gas from the
equipment and venting it outside of the operating room or bringing it to
a reservoir for safe disposal \[21\]. Vacuum exhaust is a principal
component of the medical gas system by scavenging the waste anesthetic
\[22\]. The waste disposal reservoir may use a suction regulator \[22\].
The amount of suction used should be maintained in a delicate balance
\[22\]. Excess suction could result in insuﬃcient ventilation, and an
inadequate amount of suction could result in leftover anesthetic gas
entering the operating room atmosphere \[22\]. Positive pressure should
be maintained in the operating room to drive away escaped gas \[22\].

Electrical Systems There are four main parts in the electrical system: a
master switch, an alternating current source, monitoring equipment, and
an oxygen analyzer \[21\]. The ﬁrst step is to turn on the workstation
with the master switch, then conﬁrm the

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

48

George Mychaskiw, Eric Ly, Austin Ly, et al.

machine is connected to the alternating current source \[21\]. The
alternating current source battery should be charging during workstation
use and should have at least a 30-minute reserve supply before use
\[21\]. The monitoring equipment should be checked for appropriate
functioning, leaks, or kinks, with appropriate alarm settings adjusted
for the patient \[21\]. The oxygen analyzer should be connected to the
speciﬁed point in the circuit and calibrated to at least 95% \[21\].
Safety when working with electrical systems is greatly emphasized, and
the ﬁrst step is to ensure the workstation is in a safe area, with
electrical wiring secured \[21\]. Next, malfunctions with electrical
systems and other components of the workstation do occur, so it is very
important to have a backup functioning self-inﬂating bag to ﬁt the
patient’s size \[21\]. Electrical shock or electrocution can occur if
bodily contact is made with two conductive materials at diﬀerent voltage
potentials; however, if a person is grounded, then only one live
conductor is needed to receive a shock \[22\] (see Table 3.2).

Gas Flow through the Anesthesia Machine Delivery of Oxygen and
Inhalational Agents to the Patient Nitrous Oxide Nitrous oxide is the
most rapid-onset inhalational anesthetic agent and is transported in
blood as free gas. It is considered relatively safe because of its low
potency and inability to impact vital physiologic function unless it is
combined with other, more potent inhalational agents \[25\]. Nitrous
oxide is also considered useful for its analgesic properties and reduced
perioperative pain management requirements, which can possibly reduce
the use of opioids for pain \[26, 27\].

Other Inhalational Agents/Medical Gases Medical air serves various
purposes in anesthesia, including serving as a power source for
ventilators, mixing with delivered oxygen, or as a driving gas for
chemotherapy and/or aerosolized drugs \[15\]. It can be used in three
main forms, including compressed air, synthetic air, and cylinder
manifolds. Although it is not sterile, it is considered clean at the
right temperature and pressure. Compressed medical air, used to power
ventilators, is formed by drawing ambient air into the compressor. From
there, the compressed air is moved through a series of ﬁlter driers for
separating condensed water, as well as separators to remove other
contaminants and particulate matter from the compressed air. Synthetic
air, on the other hand, is prepared by blending liquid nitrogen and
liquid oxygen in the gaseous state \[7\]. This form of medical air is
advantageous in that it does not require a power supply and there are
few, if any, contamination considerations \[15\].

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Author (year)

Das et al., 2013 \[15\] Butterworth et al., 2018 \[14, 20\]

Das et al., 2013 \[15\]

Das et al., 2013 \[15\]

Petty, 1993 \[16\]

Workstation component

Gas inlets

Gauges and sensors

Pressure regulators

Oxygen ﬂush valve

Table 3.2 Workstation component ﬁndings

Journal article

Review article

Review article

Review article Textbook chapter

Type of resource

The oxygen ﬂush valve provides additional safety to the anesthesia
machine by allowing high-ﬂow, high-pressure oxygen to ﬂow directly from
the source into the breathing circuit. In this way, oxygen bypasses the
vaporizers and ﬂowmeters. Malfunction of this feature is rare but can
cause signiﬁcant harm to the patient if this occurs, resulting in
barotraumas or intraanesthetic awareness

While the pipeline gas supply maintains relatively constant pressure,
variable gas pressure in cylinders complicates ﬂow control. In order to
utilize cylinder gas sources more safely, anesthesia machines feature a
pressure regulator that keeps the pressure between 45 and 47 psig

The pipeline inlet consistently provides gases to the anesthesia machine
at approximately 50 psig. The pressure at which a cylinder source
provides gases is more variable but is usually approximately 45 psig

Pipeline inlets are those that supply gas from pipelines that run
throughout the healthcare facility. A second gas inlet provides gas from
a secondary source, stored as either compressed gas (air, oxygen,
helium) or liqueﬁed under pressure (nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide) in
the cylinders This second gas supply is typically used as a backup
supply if the primary pipeline source were to fail

Findings

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Author (year)

Mun and No, 2013 \[17\] Dosch and Tharp, 2018 \[18\]

Anesthesia Key \[19\]

Patil et al., 2013 \[10\] Butterworth et al., 2018 \[14, 20\]

Workstation component

Pressure sensors

Oxygen ration proportioning systems

Fresh gas controllers and ﬂowmeters

Table 3.2 (cont.)

Review article Textbook chapter

Website

Review article Website

Type of resource

Flowmeters measure each individual gas before they mix together with
other gases and enter into the vaporizer Fresh gas decoupling is an
element on newer workstation models that prevents high volumes and
pressures from being transported to the patient during inspiration,
resulting in a more precise delivery of tidal volume To achieve
spontaneous ventilation, fresh gas ﬂow is set to minute ventilation. If
fresh gas ﬂow exceeds the patient’s alveolar minute ventilation, then
the fresh gas will force out the remaining alveolar gas before the next
inspiration. If the exhaled carbon dioxide volume is equal to or greater
than the

Most modern machines use a proportioning safety device instead of a
“fail-safe” threshold shutoﬀ valve. These devices reduce the pressure of
nitrous oxide and other gases, so that the proportion of nitrous oxide
to oxygen results in a minimum oxygen concentration at the common gas
outlet between 23% and 25%, depending on the manufacturer of the
anesthesia machine

When oxygen pipeline pressure drops, a fail-safe device senses this drop
and ensures that the set oxygen concentration is maintained despite loss
of oxygen pressure. The fail-safe system maintains the oxygen
concentration by promptly shutting oﬀ The drop in pressure of oxygen
sets oﬀ both audible and visual alarms that draw attention to the issue

Findings

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patil et al., 2013 \[10\]

Patil et al., 2013 \[10\] Butterworth et al., 2018 \[14, 20\]

Butterworth et al., 2018 \[14, 20\]

Goneppanavar et al., 2013 \[21\]

Workstation ventilators: bellows versus pistons

Vaporizers and manifold

Common gas outlets and check valve

Waste gas scavenging

Review article Textbook chapter

Textbook chapter

Review article Textbook chapter

Review article

Scavenging consists of collecting exhaled anesthetic from the equipment
and bringing it to a reservoir for safe disposal

The gas outlet is the single connection between the vaporized volatile
anesthetic and the patient’s airway. The gas outlet supplies the tidal
volume delivered to the patient during inspiration The purpose of the
check valve is to prevent retrograde gas ﬂow into the pipeline supplies,
which can occur from variations in positive pressure ventilation in
older anesthesia machines

Vaporizers are temperature-corrected for the speciﬁc anesthetic agent
supplied, allowing for the transport of a constant concentration of
agent, irrespective of temperature or ﬂow. This temperature correction
is signiﬁcant because high temperatures cause gas to precipitate out as
liquid Unidirectional valve malfunction has occurred in older anesthesia
machines because of condensation from water vapor. Condensation can be
reduced by heating the manifold and using water traps to collect the
liquid

Newer ventilators use electronically driven pistons to generate airﬂow
and do not require oxygen or pressurized gas consumption, an economical
feature. An advantage of a piston ventilator is the ability to deliver
accurate tidal volumes to the patient, regardless of patient size or
poor lung compliance

patient’s tidal volume, then the next inspiration will only contain
fresh gas

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Electrical systems

Workstation component

Table 3.2 (cont.)

Goneppanavar et al., 2013 \[21\] Cowles et al., 2018 \[22\]

Cowles et al., 2018 \[22\]

Author (year)

Review article Textbook chapter

Type of resource

There are four main parts in the electrical system: a master switch, an
alternating current source, monitoring equipment, and an oxygen analyzer
Electrical shock or electrocution can occur if bodily contact is made
with two conductive materials at diﬀerent voltage potentials, or one
conductive material if the person is grounded

The amount of suction used should be maintained in a delicate balance.
Excess suction could result in insuﬃcient ventilation, and an inadequate
amount of suction could result in leftover anesthetic gas

Findings

Anesthesia Equipment: Clinical Considerations

53

Medical air is considered a safe, versatile substitute for nitrous oxide
in the setting of anesthesia. A mixture of medical air and oxygen is
often used as a carrier gas, leaving the anesthesiologist to choose the
oxygen concentration and allowing greater control of the oxygen
delivered to the patient \[28\]. Medical gas mixed with oxygen has been
shown to improve the PaO2/FiO2 ratio, when compared with nitrous oxide
and air, in young, healthy patients during general anesthesia \[29\].
Likewise, medical gas is not known to carry the same side effect profile
that nitrous oxide may carry, namely hypoxic properties, postoperative
nausea and vomiting, and environmental effects (although it should be
noted that this is a minor source of atmospheric greenhouse gas) \[27,
30, 31\]. Other gases used in anesthesia include Entonox, carbon
dioxide, and heliox \[15\]. Entonox, a 50:50 combination of oxygen and
nitrous oxide, is used as an analgesic agent most often on maternity
wards, chieﬂy in labor and delivery suites. It does carry certain risks,
such as bolus delivery of hypoxic 100% nitrous oxide gas; however, if
handled correctly, this risk can be mitigated. Carbon dioxide, used for
insuﬄation during laparoscopy, is a commonly utilized gas, especially as
robotic-assisted techniques become more common in the operating room. A
colorless, odorless, and nonﬂammable gas, it is a readily available
by-product of hydrogen manufacturing, as well as a by-product from a
number of petroleum or natural gas reactions after puriﬁcation. Heliox
is another gas mixture (21% oxygen and helium), particularly of interest
in recent times. Helium’s lower density allows easy delivery to the
patient as it is more readily breathed in, reducing the overall work of
breathing for the patient undergoing general anesthesia. Helium is also
an abundant element and can be produced in the fractional distillation
of natural gas.

Anesthesia Workstation Checkout It is important that the operator has a
methodical way to ensure the proper functioning of the machine before
its use \[22\]. This is encouraged by the use of a machine “checkout” or
“checklist” performed preoperatively by the operator. By promoting
machine inspection before use, it ensures proper functioning and
increases the familiarity of the operators with the machine itself
\[14\]. Failing to ensure the proper functioning of the anesthesia
workplace equipment can lead to malfunction that results in “near
misses” or even patient injury \[32\]. By checking the equipment before
the procedure, there is a decreased risk of severe postoperative
morbidity and mortality \[33\]. With wide variations in anesthetic
equipment used by diﬀering institutions, creating a universal checklist
has proven diﬃcult to achieve. The more recently developed guidelines
have kept this in mind, with the goal of creating steps that are
applicable to all institutions.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

54

George Mychaskiw, Eric Ly, Austin Ly, et al.

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has created a general checklist
to be used by all operators of an anesthesia workspace. The ﬁrst thing
that should be checked is the machine’s location and wiring. The machine
should be placed in a safe area with wiring that is secure \[34, 35\].
Beyond this, the checkout is divided into a variety of diﬀerent
categories, including veriﬁcation of the functionality of the
high-pressure system, low-pressure system, scavenging system, breathing
system, ventilation systems, and monitors. For the high-pressure system,
it is important to check the oxygen cylinder supply, along with the
central pipeline supplies, hose connections, and gauges. The
low-pressure system checklist should include verifying the status of ﬂow
control valves and ﬁll level, performing the leak check with a suction
bulb, and testing ﬂowmeters through their full range of output. For the
scavenging system, it is important to adjust and conﬁrm the connections
between the system and the adjustable pressure-limiting (APL) valve,
along with the ventilator relief valves. The waste gas vacuum should
also be adjusted accordingly. The breathing system should have the
oxygen monitor calibrated, along with checking the initial status of the
breathing system for a complete circuit, installing the breathing
circuit accessory equipment, and veriﬁcation of no leaks in the system.
The unidirectional valves of the ventilation system should also be
properly functioning. All monitors should be calibrated, with alarms set
for the capnograph, pulse oximeter, oxygen analyzer, respiratory volume
monitor, and pressure monitor with high and low airway pressure alarms.
Other miscellaneous items should also be checked, such as proper
functioning of suction, for instance \[14\]. Following these protocols
should theoretically take &lt;10 minutes, and this time is reduced in
the event that an institution has a self-checking machine. In the case
of a change of anesthesiologist during a procedure, the handoﬀ should
include checking that the machine and its components are properly
functioning. Long procedures should involve periodic checks for volatile
anesthetic liquid and carbon dioxide absorbent \[22\].

Comparison of Modern Anesthesia Workstations Modern anesthetic
workstations consist of six speciﬁc subsystems. These subsystems include
gas supplies, ﬂow meters, vaporizers, gas delivery systems, scavenging
systems, and monitoring systems \[2\]. Advantages of these workstations
include improved accuracy of vaporizers, included software for improved
control of gas ﬂow and vaporizer output, increased sophistication of
electronic alarms, advanced modes of ventilation, self-testing
capabilities, lower dead space, sleeker and more eﬃcient design, and
automated records. Modernized anesthesia workstations have improved on
the “bag-in-bottle” ventilation system to ascending and descending
bellows. The most obvious improvement in design is perhaps in the
improved monitoring systems displayed on user-friendly and easily
conﬁgured to preference monitors. Many

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Anesthesia Equipment: Clinical Considerations

55

workstations oﬀer increased real-time communications between the station
and other departments such as the laboratory, pharmacy, and radiology
\[10\]. Drager Medical, GE Healthcare, Maquet Getinge Group, Mindray
North America, and Penlon create the most popular anesthesia
workstations today. Table 3.3 details the diﬀerences between Drager
Medical’s and GE Healthcare’s machines, two of the most popular
workstations today \[36\]. Many of the dimensions of these workstations
are very similar, and user preference should dictate purchase and trust
in the respective manufacturer. A recent 2017 study investigated the
error rates of the workstations of Drager Medical, GE Healthcare, and
Maquet. Workstations by all three manufacturers exhibited low overall
user error rates. Operators in the study most commonly rated the
usability of Drager Medical’s workstations higher than that of
workstations of the other companies. However, these operators had
routinely worked with Drager Medical’s workstations in their practice
and were more accustomed to its user interface. Inherent diﬀerences
exist between the workstations in the user interface for accomplishing
routine anesthesia tasks, but diﬀerent operators may come to prefer
diﬀerent interfaces. Limitations in usability exist across the diﬀerent
manufacturers, but the study found experienced operators to accomplish
tasks eﬃciently regardless \[37\]. For hospitals, provider-owned
distributors, private practices, and other physician groups, inevitably
the decision of anesthesia workstations will come to user preference.
Proper training of personnel is ﬁrst and foremost. While modernized
anesthetic workstations have many advantages, certain limitations still
persist in the design for certain workstations. These limitations
include power supply dependence on electricity, no carbon monoxide
production detection, a descending bellows system that delivers some
positive endexpiratory pressure (PEEP) during ventilation, and movement
of the ascending bellows regardless of a faulty leak \[10\] (see Table
3.3).

Conclusion The modern anesthesia workstation is an important tool for
the delivery of anesthesia care. Throughout the history of anesthesia,
it has evolved from a simple gas delivery system of a few metal tubes
and valves to a sophisticated and complex apparatus for the precise
measurement and delivery of medical gases and volatile anesthetics,
along with multiple modes of mechanical ventilation. Contemporary
anesthesia workstations incorporate numerous safety features that have
resulted in the practice of anesthesiology being a far safer and more
precise science than in the premodern era of open-drop ether and
ﬂammable anesthetic agents. Increasingly, anesthesia workstations are
electronically and computer-controlled. As with any complex piece of
medical equipment, patient injury can result from operator error or
equipment failure, so it is important that the anesthesia practitioner
is thoroughly familiar with

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

56

George Mychaskiw, Eric Ly, Austin Ly, et al. Table 3.3 Comparison of
Drager Medical and GE Healthcare anesthesia machines by dimensions and
speciﬁcs Drager Medical

GE Healthcare

Flow control method

Electronic

Conventional ﬂowmeters

Anesthetic gasdriving mechanisms

Piston

Bellows

Ventilation modes

VCV, PSV, PCV, volume mode autoﬂow

VCV, SIMV-PC, PSV, PSVPro, PCV, PCV-VG

Ventilator display

Color, ﬂat screen

Color SVGA LCD

Dimensions

59 × 33.5 × 31.5 in

53.5 × 29.5 × 29.1 cm

Weight

365 lb

300 lb

Drawers

Two drawers, one lockable

Two drawers

Vaporizer mount type

Auto or manual exclusion

Select-a-Tec

Vaporizer positions

Two or three vaporizers

Two vaporizers

Battery backup

Yes

Yes

Gas types

Oxygen, nitrous oxide, air

Oxygen, nitrous oxide, air

Carbon dioxide absorber capacity

1.5 L

1.76 L

VCV, volume-controlled ventilation; PSV, pressure support ventilation;
PCV, pressure-controlled ventilation; SIMV-PC, synchronized intermittent
mandatory ventilation pressure control; PSVPro, pressure support
ventilation with ventilator backup if spontaneous respirations stop;
PCV-VG, pressure-controlled ventilation–volume guaranteed. See reference
\[36\].

the proper checkout and functioning of the anesthesia workstation.
Additionally, backup safety equipment, outside of the anesthesia
workstation (e.g., self-inﬂating ventilation bag/mask, suction, oxygen
cylinder, and ﬂowmeter) should be immediately available, in the event of
workstation failure or breakdown. A program of regular preventative
maintenance, by either the manufacturer or other qualiﬁed professional,
is also essential for safe and reliable functioning of the anesthesia
workstation.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.004 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

4

Patient Monitoring William Lee, Nihir Patel, and Christina Jeng

Introduction Patient monitoring is fundamental to the job of the
anesthesiologist. Anesthetic drugs and surgical procedures can produce
rapid changes in patient physiology and these changes may last
throughout the perioperative period. It is essential that
anesthesiologists have the capability to monitor these changes in real
time to optimize patient safety and care throughout the perioperative
period. The information acquired via various monitoring devices can be
used to maintain quality patient care, but it does not guarantee any
particular outcome. Multiple medical societies, including the preeminent
anesthesiology society, the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA),
have agreed upon a standard set of monitoring devices referred to as the
ASA standard monitors. Other monitoring devices and invasive monitoring
methods may be used, in addition to the standard ASA monitors, depending
on speciﬁc patient and intraoperative surgical concerns. It is important
that anesthesiologists are aware of the variety of devices at their
disposal, so that they may appropriately utilize those monitors to
optimize and ensure quality patient care.

Standard Intraoperative Patient Monitoring A basic standard of
monitoring has been recommended by various societies, including the ASA,
for any procedures performed with an anesthetic administered by an
anesthesiologist. The common theme among these standard requirements is
their ability to monitor a patient’s oxygenation, ventilation,
circulation, and temperature. These four components provide a thorough,
albeit not comprehensive, physiologic snapshot of a patient. During most
procedures, these four components can be monitored via the standard ASA
monitors. These include pulse oximetry to ensure adequate oxygenation,
arterial blood pressure monitoring usually with a noninvasive blood
pressure (NIBP) cuﬀ and electrocardiography (ECG) to ensure adequate
circulation, capnography to ensure adequate ventilation, and a
thermometer to measure temperature. While these monitors are incredibly
useful, they do not replace a vigilant clinician closely observing the
patient throughout the procedure. 60

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patient Monitoring

61

Pulse Oximetry Pulse oximetry provides a signiﬁcant amount of
information with regard to oxygenation and circulation. The oximeter
utilizes the diﬀering light absorptions of oxyhemoglobin and
deoxyhemoglobin to determine the overall oxygen saturation of the
patient’s hemoglobin. Oxygenated hemoglobin absorbs more infrared light
at approximately 940 nm, and deoxyhemoglobin absorbs red light at 660
nm. The oximeter is typically placed on a single digit or earlobe, the
nasal septum, or another part of the patient’s body in which the
oximeter can pulse light through the tissue and subsequently register it
on the other side. As oxygenated blood pulses through the tissue between
the oximeter, a ratio is generated via these diﬀering absorptions to
determine an approximation of the partial pressure of oxygen in the
patient’s blood and the resulting oxygen saturation (see Table 4.1). The
oxygen saturation is measured during arterial pulsations of blood, which
also allows for a relatively accurate measurement of the pulse rate and
rhythm. Most pulse oximeters generate a plethysmographic waveform and
emit a pitched tone with each pulsation that correlates with various
levels of oxygenation. The waveform can demonstrate whether or not the
probe is positioned appropriately, and a change in waveform may indicate
decreased perfusion. A change in the pitch with a proper waveform may
represent decreased oxygenation. This audiovisual tool helps
anesthesiologists to both see and hear the patient’s rate, rhythm, and
oxygenation while performing other tasks to address multiple patient
care issues. Table 4.1 Partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) with
blood oxygen saturation (SaO2) estimations PaO2 (mmHg)

SaO2 (%)

100

100

95

97

85

96

75

95

60

90

50

85

40

75

30

60

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

62

William Lee, Nihir Patel, and Christina Jeng

Of note, pulse oximetry may not always be accurate. Signiﬁcant patient
movement can disrupt wavelength monitoring and make it diﬃcult for the
oximeter to determine pulsations. Additionally, if the patient has
altered forms of hemoglobin (that is, methemoglobin and
carboxyhemoglobin), the oximeter will not provide a reliable
representation of oxygen saturation. Carboxyhemoglobin will result in a
falsely high reading, as it absorbs infrared light similarly to
oxyhemoglobin. Methemoglobin will absorb light closer to 640 nm and
consequently may decrease the average oxygenated hemoglobin reading
registered by the oximeter. Thus, while pulse oximetry has enormous
utility, its limitations and possibility for error should be kept in
mind, so as to avoid misinterpretations of the patient’s physiology.

Blood Pressure Monitoring Blood pressure monitoring is a direct
measurement of circulation, and a blood pressure measurement within
normal range typically represents adequate perfusion. For the vast
majority of cases, NIBP monitoring every 3–5 minutes is adequate to
ensure hemodynamic stability. There are multiple techniques for NIBP
monitoring. The most common method is via oscillometry, which measures
oscillations that occur with arterial pulsations after compression with
a pressure cuﬀ. Maximum oscillations occur at the point of the mean
arterial pressure (MAP), and systolic and diastolic blood pressures are
subsequently calculated based on the measured MAP and the measured
oscillations. Oscillometry can be inaccurate if the patient does not
have a sinus rhythm, if an inappropriate cuﬀ size is used, or in cases
of extreme hypertension or hypotension. Other forms of NIBP monitoring
can be utilized and should be readily available if the automated
oscillometer malfunctions or is unavailable. These include pulse
palpation of the extremities with or without cuﬀ occlusion to estimate
systolic pressure and auscultation via a stethoscope while using a
sphygmomanometer or a Doppler probe which measures sound waves from the
traveling pressure wave in the artery. During procedures that require
beat-to-beat blood pressure monitoring, such as procedures that could
result in signiﬁcant blood loss or rapid blood pressure changes or
procedures that require multiple instances of intraoperative blood
sampling, intraarterial blood pressure monitoring can be utilized. The
risks of placing an intraarterial catheter include bleeding, nerve
damage, thrombosis, arterial dissection, aneurysm, hematoma, infection,
and vascular compromise at the puncture site. The procedure is performed
in a sterile fashion by use of a small-gauge catheter. Common sites of
arterial cannulation are the radial, axillary, femoral, and dorsalis
pedis arteries, secondary to their ease of access and ease of securing
the catheter externally without dampening of the arterial pressure
waveform. Other sites for cannulation include the brachial or ulnar
arteries. The brachial artery is often avoided secondary to

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patient Monitoring

63

its proximity to the median nerve, as well as the lack of collateral
blood ﬂow should thrombosis or other injury to the artery occur. The
ulnar artery has also historically been avoided, as it is considered the
primary arterial supply to the hand and is often deeper and more
tortuous than the radial artery, making it more diﬃcult to access. When
intraarterial blood pressure monitoring is used, pressure transducers
utilize mechanical energy from pressure changes within the artery to
generate electrical energy and a digital signal that is then transferred
to the computer monitor observed by the anesthesiologist. When the
patient is in the supine position, the transducer should be placed at
the level of the heart for an accurate MAP reading that determines
cardiac perfusion and cerebral perfusion at the level of the circle of
Willis. In cases where the patient’s position is altered, the transducer
should be maintained in a position that allows for accurate measurement
of the vital organs. Most commonly, when a patient is placed in an
upright or sitting position, the level of the transducer should be
elevated to coincide with the level of the circle of Willis to ensure
adequate cerebral perfusion. The appearance of the arterial waveform may
vary with the diﬀerent vessel sites, but the waveform has some standard
components. As shown in Figure 4.1, the initial spike is the systolic
upstroke and is a surrogate for left ventricular contractility. This
spike is followed by a small dip and then a dicrotic notch, representing
the end of systole and closure of the aortic valve. Lastly, a second
drop in the waveform back to baseline is representative of the diastolic
pressure and peripheral vascular resistance. Signiﬁcant variability in
the waveform with respirations or intraabdominal pressure changes can be
indicative of decreased intravascular volume.

Capnography, Gas Analysis, and End-Tidal Carbon Dioxide While delivering
any anesthetic, the ability to perform real-time inhalational gas
analysis can be an important tool to monitor a patient’s ventilation,
level of sedation, adequacy of analgesia, and airway patency while
simultaneously indicating possible pathologies. Exhaled gas analysis is
typically performed via infrared spectroscopy and is available with most
anesthesia machines. Exhaled gas from a sidestream port passes through
infrared light and the diﬀerent components of that gas reﬂect or absorb
infrared at diﬀerent rates. This allows the sensor to determine what
concentrations of gases are present. The composition of the expired air
is then displayed as various percentages, which can inform the
anesthesiologist how much nitrous oxide, volatile anesthetic gas, and
carbon dioxide the patient is exhaling. An oxygen analyzer is available
with every anesthesia machine and is paramount to ensure that a patient
does not receive a hypoxic gas mixture. Modern-day oxygen analysis
occurs either via a galvanic fuel cell or, most

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

64

William Lee, Nihir Patel, and Christina Jeng

Figure 4.1 Standard intra-arterial blood pressure waveform and its
correlation with electrocardiography. (1) Systolic upstroke followed by
(2) the systolic peak pressure; (3) the systolic decline leading to the
dicrotic notch (4); (5) represents the diastolic runoﬀ ending at (6),
the end-diastolic pressure. Source: Reproduced from Mark JB. Atlas of
Cardiovascular Monitoring. Chapter 8, Fig. 8–1, page 94. New York,
Copyright Elsevier and Churchill Livingstone,1998.

commonly, via a paramagnetic oxygen analyzer, which takes advantage of
the electron imbalance in the oxygen molecule to create a magnetic ﬁeld.
While most anesthesia machines will perform an oxygen calibration with
an automated check, it is important to ensure that the machine is
appropriately calibrated to the atmospheric oxygen level (normal 21%)
prior to any procedure to ensure adequate measurements during the
delivery of anesthetic. Carbon dioxide analysis in the form of end-tidal
carbon dioxide (ETCO2) can provide valuable information regarding the
patient’s metabolic status, respiratory pattern, and ventilation. The
gas analyzer can generate a waveform based on the quantity of carbon
dioxide exhaled, known as a capnograph. Additionally, the ETCO2 can be
used to monitor a patient’s respiratory pattern and assess clinical
changes. In a spontaneously ventilating patient, an increase in the
number of respirations, as measured by ETCO2, can represent inadequate
sedation or increased analgesic requirement. Similarly, a decrease in
ETCO2 can represent oversedation or decreased ventilatory drive. In an
intubated patient who is mechanically ventilated, the ETCO2 pattern can
provide information regarding the adequacy of ventilation based on the
waveform of the capnograph. For

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patient Monitoring

65

example, a “shark ﬁn” waveform (see Figure 4.2) is indicative of an
obstructive respiratory disorder, including acute bronchospastic disease
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Abrupt decreases in the
capnograph waveform may be indicative of: a circuit disconnect or
circuit leak; decreased perfusion in the setting of new-onset pulmonary
embolism, heart failure, anaphylaxis, or cardiac arrest; or severe
airway obstruction (that is, mucus plugging or severe multifocal
bronchospasm). Changes in capnography, coupled with clinical
observations, can guide and improve management.

Figure 4.2 End-tidal carbon dioxide: example patterns of capnography.
(A) Normal capnograph demonstrating the three phases of expiration:
phase I – dead space; phase II – mixture of dead space and alveolar gas;
phase III – alveolar gas plateau. (B) Capnograph of a patient with
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. No plateau is reached
before the next inspiration. The gradient between end-tidal carbon
dioxide and arterial carbon dioxide is increased. (C) Depression during
phase III indicates spontaneous respiratory eﬀort. (D) Failure of
inspired carbon dioxide to return to zero may represent an incompetent
expiratory valve or exhausted carbon dioxide absorbent. (E) Persistence
of exhaled gas during part of the inspiratory cycle signals the presence
of an incompetent inspiratory valve. Source: Reproduced with permission
from Morgan and Mikhail’s Clinical Anesthesiology: Chapter 6
Noncardiovascular monitoring. New York, Copyright Mcgraw-Hill, 2013.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

66

William Lee, Nihir Patel, and Christina Jeng

Temperature Monitoring The temperature of a patient can dramatically
impact physiology, especially during general and neuraxial anesthetics.
When general or neuraxial anesthesia is induced, the patient’s
vasculature undergoes signiﬁcant vasodilation. This allows heat to move
from the body’s core to the periphery, causing hypothermia. Hypothermia
can lead to decreased drug metabolism, coagulopathy, and poor perfusion,
whereas hyperthermia can lead to tachycardia and neurologic injury. Core
temperature can be monitored by placing a thermometer on the tympanic
membrane or in the nasopharyngeal space, distal esophagus, or pulmonary
artery. Often, direct measurement of core temperature is not always
feasible and other appropriate sites such as the bladder, rectum,
proximal esophagus, and axilla can also be used to provide a reliable
and continuous measurement of a patient’s temperature.

Electrocardiography Standard intraoperative ECG monitoring for adults
consists of a ﬁve-lead ECG, including the right arm, left arm, right
leg, and left leg and V5 precordial leads. This allows the
anesthesiologist to monitor the three limb leads, as well as the V5
waveform, for myocardial rhythm, ischemia, and electrolyte imbalances.
Most commonly, leads II and V5 are displayed on the monitor. Lead II is
utilized to analyze rhythm, as it often has the most prominent P wave
and it can also indicate inferior wall ischemia. Lead V5 is one of the
most sensitive indicators for ischemia, as it can best display lateral
wall ischemia and is a proxy for observing the perfusion area of the
left anterior descending artery or left circumﬂex coronary artery.
Importantly, lead placement may need to be adjusted based on the
procedure, patient position, or anatomy, so that a patient can be
appropriately monitored. Modifying the lead placement can allow for
ﬂexibility in what portion of the heart electrical activity is observed.
If a patient has a known area of ischemia, lead placement should be
adjusted accordingly to observe this area of perfusion. While most
healthy patients are unlikely to have a major perioperative adverse
cardiac event, patients with preexisting coronary artery disease (CAD)
or risk factors for CAD (i.e., smoking, diabetes, poor exercise
tolerance, obesity, etc.) have a higher risk of an intraoperative and
perioperative cardiac event, and therefore, continuous ECG should be
monitored in order to detect changes in electrical activity that may
indicate an ischemic event. New-onset conduction blocks, arrhythmias,
and ST segment elevations or depressions can be indicative of ischemia
(see Figure 4.3). Lastly, ECG can help the anesthesiologist suspect and
detect electrolyte imbalances. Most prominently, the more extreme values
of potassium, calcium, and magnesium can be identiﬁed within ECG changes
and prompt further testing to guide speciﬁc treatments to avoid possible
fatal cardiac arrhythmias.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patient Monitoring

67

Figure 4.3 Common ECG waves and their implications. Source: Reproduced
with permission from Cardiac Anesthesia and Transesophageal
Echocardiography: Chapter 3. Perioperative rhythm abnormalities. New
York, Copyright McGraw-Hill, 2011.

Advanced Cardiovascular Monitoring Devices Central Venous Pressure In
the past, central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring was commonly used for
many high-risk surgeries, given its ease of measurement after placement
of a central venous catheter. It was considered a surrogate for
intravascular volume status and a predictor of ﬂuid overload. While this
has been disproven,

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

68

William Lee, Nihir Patel, and Christina Jeng

the waveform and pressure trend can be helpful in conjunction with other
indicators of ﬂuid overload or hypovolemia. It is important to be
acquainted with a normal CVP waveform (see Figure 4.4) in order to
recognize the changes that can be indicative of pathology. For example,
a new-onset large a wave, also known as a cannon a wave, can be
indicative of improper conduction and pressure being transmitted from
atrial contraction against a closed tricuspid valve, while fused c and v
waves can be indicative of regurgitation or right ventricular failure.

Pulmonary Artery Catheter Pulmonary artery catheters (PACs) are invasive
monitoring devices that can be used to assess a patient’s hemodynamic
status. A PAC can provide measurements of a patient’s cardiac output,
pulmonary pressures, core temperature, mixed venous saturation (a
surrogate for perfusion and cardiac output), and pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure (a surrogate for left atrial pressure). Although this
information can help direct clinical management of complex patients,
PACs have not been proven to decrease mortality and are not routinely
used. When the CVP is measured and a PAC is in place, multiple
calculations can be performed to determine cardiac and physiologic

mm Hg

R

ECG tracing

P

T

Q S Jugular tracing

a

c

v x

y

Figure 4.4 CVP waveform and its correlation to electrocardiography.
Source: Reproduced with permission from Morgan and Mikhail’s Clinical
Anesthesiology: Chapter 5 Cardiovascular monitoring. New York, Copyright
McGraw-Hill, 2013.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patient Monitoring

69

Table 4.2 Useful formulae for perioperative hemodynamic calculations
Variable

Formula

Normal

Units

Cardiac index

Cardiac output ðL=minÞ Body surface area ðm2 Þ

2.2–4.2

L/min/m2

ðMAP  CVPÞ×80 Cardiac output ðL=minÞ

1200– 1500

dynes·s cm−5

Pulmonary vascular resistance

ðPA  PAOPÞ×80 Cardiac output ðL=minÞ

100–300

dynes·s cm−5

Stroke volume

Cardiac output

60–90

mL/bear

Stroke index (SI)

Stroke volumeðmL=beatÞ Body surface areaðm2 Þ  0:0136 PA–CVP ×SI

20–65

ml/ beat/m2

30–65

g-m/ beat/m2

0:0136ðMAP–PAOPÞ×SI

46–60

g-m/ beat/m2

Total peripheral resistance

Right ventricular strokework index Left ventricular strokework index



L=minÞ×1000 Heart rateðbeats=min



Source: Reproduced with permission from Morgan and Mikhail’s Clinical
Anesthesiology: Chapter 5 Cardiovascular monitoring. New York, Copyright
McGraw-Hill, 2013.

parameters of the patient (see Table 4.2) that can be helpful in making
a thorough assessment of the patient at any given time.

Transthoracic and Transesophageal Echocardiography Transthoracic
echocardiography (TTE) is an important tool that is simple and
noninvasive, and can be easily performed to provide real-time analysis
of basic cardiac function. While it is beyond the scope of this chapter,
TTE will likely become more widely used intraoperatively and
postoperatively to help monitor a patient’s general cardiac function,
valvular abnormalities, and wall ischemia, especially by clinicians who
are trained in focus-assessed transthoracic echocardiography (FATE) (see
below). Similarly, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is a
relatively low-risk, informative tool that can provide

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

70

William Lee, Nihir Patel, and Christina Jeng

a full scope of cardiac function. Some relative contraindications to TEE
include gastric or esophageal surgery, gastric or esophageal pathology,
arteriovenous malformations, portal hypertension with esophageal
varices, perforated viscus, or patients who have recently ingested,
particularly with an unprotected airway. While not all anesthesiologists
are certiﬁed to perform TEE, if available, it can provide even more
accurate and comprehensive information than TTE. During an acute event,
it can provide rapid, highquality information that may help guide
treatment.

Other Monitoring Devices Point-of-Care Ultrasound (POCUS) As ultrasound
technology has become more widely available, the anesthesiologist’s
ability to observe and diagnose physiologic changes in real time has
improved. Anesthesiologists should be well versed in several standard
ultrasound examinations, including focused assessment with sonography in
trauma (FAST) and FATE. With an experienced operator, the FAST
examination has high utility for both trauma and perioperative patients,
especially if they are hemodynamically unstable or if there is concern
for hemorrhage. A FAST examination is performed with a curvilinear probe
and includes four views: subxiphoid to visualize the pericardium and
retrocardiac space; the hepatorenal and splenorenal recesses to
visualize retroperitoneal ﬂuid or bleeding; and lastly the suprapubic
view to visualize pelvic ﬂuid or blood. If any of the sites demonstrate
signiﬁcant ﬂuid, it is possible the patient is bleeding and may need
interventional hemostasis, blood transfusion, or vasoactive support to
ensure hemodynamic stability. The FATE examination can be helpful in
obtaining an overview of a patient’s cardiac function. The four views –
parasternal long and short axes, apical four-chamber, and subcostal –
are best identiﬁed with a phased-array probe and can allow the operator
to visualize left ventricular function, right ventricular strain or
failure, vascular prolapse, valvular stenosis, and pericardial ﬂuid.
While quantiﬁcation of these pathologies may be diﬃcult with standard
ultrasound, visualizing the anatomy and possible cardiac pathology can
help guide management perioperatively.

Urine Output Urine output is often considered a proxy measurement for
renal perfusion. Adequate urine output is deﬁned as 0.5–1 ml/(kg hr) and
is a fairly reliable surrogate for perfusion of the kidneys, though it
does not guarantee adequate kidney function. Moreover, monitoring urine
output can help guide ﬂuid management. While other cardiovascular
monitoring devices can be utilized, urine output alone may be a good
indicator of adequate ﬂuid resuscitation.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patient Monitoring

71

Neuromuscular Blockade Monitoring Neuromuscular blocking (NMB) agents
are often utilized to optimize surgical conditions and prevent patient
movement during surgical procedures. A nerve stimulator or an
accelerometer are tools to measure the level of neuromuscular blockade
and recovery. Nerve stimulators can be applied to various sites to
stimulate diﬀerent nerves and subsequent muscle contraction (see Table
4.3). Reactions to tetanus, dual-burst stimulation, and train-of-four
(TOF) stimulation can give the anesthesiologist information about the
degree of neuromuscular blockade. TOF stimulation is performed by
stimulating the nerve with an electrical signal four times in automatic,
rapid succession and then observing for muscle twitches in the
distribution of the nerve stimulated. When NMB agents are in full eﬀect,
stimulation of nerves will likely result in no twitches, but as recovery
occurs, more twitches will be visible. When four twitches are present, a
TOF ratio can be performed via an accelerometer, a device that measures
the amplitude of each twitch and provides a ratio of the last twitch,
compared to the ﬁrst. Full recovery from neuromuscular blockade is
commonly deﬁned as a TOF ratio &gt;0.9. It is important to note that in
order to achieve adequate recovery, medications to reverse neuromuscular
blockade should only be administered when there is at least one twitch
present.

Table 4.3 Approximate electrode placement for neuromuscular blockade
monitoring Nerve

Muscle(s) stimulated

Proximal electrode placement

Distal electrode placement

Ulnar nerve

Adductor pollicis

Flexor and medial surface of the forearm, 3–5 cm proximal to distal
placement

Flexor and medial surface of the forearm, just proximal to the palm

Facial nerve

Orbicularis oculi

Next to the tragus of the ear on the face

1–2 cm superior and ipsilateral to the eyebrow on the lateral portion

Common peroneal nerve

Tibialis anterior

1–2 cm distal and parallel to the ﬁbular head

1–2 cm distal and parallel to the ﬁbular head

Tibial nerve

Flexor hallucis brevis

3–5 cm superior and 1–2 cm posterior to the medial malleolus

1–2 cm inferior and posterior to the medial malleolus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

72

William Lee, Nihir Patel, and Christina Jeng

Consciousness Monitoring Patients are often most concerned about
awareness while under general anesthesia. Previously, monitoring of
consciousness and the plane of anesthesia was performed exclusively by
clinical observation of pupil size, ocular movement, cranial nerve
reﬂexes, and vital signs. Advances in electroencephalography (EEG)
technology have allowed for the advent of consciousness monitoring that
is convenient and can be utilized by the anesthesiologist
intraoperatively. The most common of these technologies is the
bispectral index (BIS). The BIS processes EEG signals obtained from a
probe placed on the patient’s forehead to generate a unitless number
that helps anesthesiologists estimate consciousness. A BIS value of
40–60 has been used as an indicator of adequate depth of general
anesthesia. While it can potentially indicate less likelihood of
awareness, the BIS can be aﬀected by motor activity and electrocautery.
Additionally, there have been case reports of awareness occurring even
when BIS monitoring was applied and maintained below a value of 60.
Clinical signs of awareness, such as sweating, tearing, and increased
heart rate and blood pressure, can all be indicative of a light plane of
anesthesia and should always be considered in conjunction with the BIS
monitor. Although EEG monitoring provides valuable information, these
monitoring devices do not guarantee that a patient will not experience
awareness under anesthesia.

Neuromonitoring While rarely monitored by the anesthesiologist directly,
neurologic monitoring may be performed intraoperatively for procedures
that can impact the brain or spinal cord. The anesthetics employed can
impact the data gathered by these monitors. More speciﬁcally,
somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs), motor evoked potentials (MEPs),
brain–auditory evoked potentials (BAEPs), and lastly visual evoked
potentials (VEPs) can all be utilized to monitor speciﬁc neurologic
pathways. For example, procedures involving the spinal cord will include
monitoring that is focused on MEPs via the corticospinal tract and on
SSEPs via the spinothalamic tract. This monitoring is performed by
sending electrical signals through these spinal cord pathways and
measuring the potentials generated. A waveform is generated by a given
electrical signal, and increases in latency or decreases in amplitude
may indicate injury to the nerve tract. SSEPs and MEPs are very
sensitive to volatile anesthetic agents. Therefore, when neuromonitoring
is expected to be used, volatile agents should be avoided. Use of NMB
agents would also abolish all forms of MEP due to the inability of
muscle to respond to a stimulus. Total intravenous anesthesia without
long-acting neuromuscular blockade is usually utilized for these cases.
BAEPs and VEPs are rarely used. VEPs share a similar sensitivity to

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Patient Monitoring

73

SSEPs with regard to anesthetics. BAEPs are the most resistant to
anesthetic agents but are limited as to what information they provide,
given they are only an indicator that the brainstem and auditory
neurological tracts are intact.

Review Questions 1. Which of the following monitors is not considered
part of the standard of care during general anesthesia, as deﬁned by the
American Society of Anesthesiologists? (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)

Blood pressure Electrocardiography Pulse oximetry End-tidal carbon
dioxide Urine output

2.  Which of the following is the best proxy measurement for left
    ventricular function during intraarterial blood pressure monitoring?

<!-- -->

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 

Dicrotic notch Baseline value of a waveform Systolic upstroke Area under
an individual waveform Second peak of an arterial waveform

Answers 1 (e) While urine output is a valuable tool to measure renal
perfusion, as a proxy for general perfusion and intravascular volume
status, it is not considered a standard monitor during general
anesthesia. 2 (c) The slope of the systolic upstroke is considered a
surrogate for left ventricular contraction. If a patient has systolic
heart failure, the slope of the systolic upstroke would be decreased,
and thus slower to rise.

Further Reading American Society of Anesthesiologists. Standards for
basic anesthetic monitoring. 2015. Available from:
www.asahq.org/standards-and-guidelines/standards-for-basicanesthetic-monitoring.
Butterworth JF, Mackey DC, Wasnick JD. Chapter 5. Cardiovascular
monitoring. In: JF Butterworth, DC Mackey, JD Wasnick, eds. Morgan &
Mikhail’s Clinical Anesthesiology, 5th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2013. Available from: https://acc
essanesthesiology.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?sectionid=42800535&bookid=564.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.005 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

5

Inhalational Anesthetics Ricardo Diaz Milian

Introduction Inhalational anesthetics (IAs) are a group of medications
utilized, almost exclusively, for the induction and maintenance of
anesthesia during surgery. The demonstration of ether anesthesia in 1846
marked the beginning of the use of IAs in clinical practice. Today,
modern IAs are used widely, mainly due to their reliability, minimal
interindividual variation of the desired pharmacological eﬀect, and the
ease of continuous monitoring during anesthesia. Interestingly, the
exact mechanism of action of modern IAs is not completely understood.
However, recent developments in basic neuropharmacology have elucidated
a probable mechanism of action. IAs display unique pharmacokinetics due
to the fact that they are gases and are delivered directly to the lungs
via the anesthesia machine. Consequently, the interactions of IAs with
the body (pharmacokinetics) are very diﬀerent in comparison to other
anesthetics that are administered intravenously. IAs have proven to be
instrumental in the modern practice of anesthesia. However, they are not
without unwanted adverse eﬀects, some of which can be lifethreatening. A
deep understanding of these potent drugs and their eﬀects on patients is
indispensable for the practice of anesthesiology. This chapter will
brieﬂy review the history of IAs and describe the pharmacology of these
drugs, including potential complications.

History Diethyl ether has been known for centuries. However, in 1842,
Crawford Williamson began experimenting with the administration of the
drug as an anesthetic for small surgeries. This event initiated a course
of events that paved the way to the use of volatile gases to provide
anesthesia \[1\]. In October 16, 1846, William Thomas Green Morton
demonstrated the use of inhaled ether to an audience at the
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston on what is now known as “ether
day” \[2\]. Although he is not credited as the ﬁrst person to utilize an
IA, his demonstration received worldwide attention and revolutionized
the practice of medicine. Nitrous oxide was discovered in 1772 by Joseph
Priestley, and in 1844, the ﬁrst demonstration of its medical use was 75

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

76

Ricardo Diaz Milian

performed during dental extractions \[3\]. This makes nitrous oxide the
oldest IA currently in use. Modern ﬂuorinated hydrocarbon anesthetics
are very simple chemical compounds with an interesting historical
origin. Their development was facilitated by the ultrasecret Manhattan
Project, which was commissioned to develop nuclear weapons during the
Second World War. Prior to this eﬀort, there was little interest in the
chemistry of such compounds. However, during the late 1930s, a sudden
and intense interest in ﬂuorine chemistry emerged as ﬂuorine was
recognized as a valuable adjuvant in the process of uranium enrichment.
Enriched uranium is a critical constituent of atomic weapons. Shortly
after, it was recognized that ﬂuorinated hydrocarbons had anesthetic
properties \[4\]. However, it was not until 1956 that Raventos
discovered halothane, the ﬁrst ﬂuorinated anesthetic of clinical
utility. The development of the modern ﬂuorinated hydrocarbon
anesthetics currently in use (desﬂurane, isoﬂurane, and sevoﬂurane) was
the result of extensive research and experimentation with the objective
of improving the characteristics of earliergeneration anesthetics \[5\].

Pharmacology All IAs are gases with diﬀerent chemical structures, but
similar clinical eﬀects. Chemically, they comprise halogenated
hydrocarbons, ethers, alkanes, noble gases, aromatic molecules, and
alcohols \[6\]. Modern anesthetics in current use include the ﬂuorinated
hydrocarbons desﬂurane (CF2 H-O-CFH-CF3), isoﬂurane (CF2 H-O-CCIH-CF3),
and sevoﬂurane (CFH2-O-CH\[CF3\]2) \[7\], and the inorganic gas nitrous
oxide (N2O). Other anesthetics such as halothane and enﬂurane are still
used in some developing countries. Interestingly, a resurgence of ether
has also been proposed \[8\]. However, the use of these older
anesthetics is generally disfavored due to their side eﬀect proﬁle. This
chapter will only discuss the modern halogenated anesthetics and nitrous
oxide.

Pharmacodynamics General anesthesia can be deﬁned as a reversible state
of drug-induced unconsciousness, amnesia, analgesia, and immobility in
response to a surgical stimulus \[9\]. The exact mechanism by which IAs
can induce and maintain general anesthesia has not yet been fully
elucidated and remains one of the biggest mysteries of
neuropharmacology. However, recent developments have given some insight
into the likely pathways of unconsciousness caused by these drugs. A
unique property of IAs is that they exert the same biological eﬀects in
all living organisms, including animals, plants, and even prokaryotes
\[10\]. This means that all organisms, complex or unicellular, can be
reversibly anesthetized \[6\]. The

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Inhalational Anesthetics

77

extent to which these drugs aﬀect the entirety of earth’s biodiversity
supports a target molecule or group of molecules that are fundamental to
life, and therefore universally preserved throughout the evolution of
species. These target molecules have remained elusive; however, it is
known that anesthetics aﬀect vital intracellular processes, including
mitochondrial energy pathways, cytoskeletal structure, and ion channel
function. An important clinical consequence of the homogeneity of eﬀects
of IAs is that there is very little interspecies diﬀerence in response
among all diﬀerent genotypes. This means that there is a strong and
predictable correlation between IA concentration and observed eﬀects in
most humans. This property, combined with the ability to continuously
monitor their end-tidal concentrations, is what makes them very reliable
drugs for maintenance of anesthesia during surgery. At the beginning of
the twentieth century, Meyer and Overton independently discovered the
correlation between lipid solubility and anesthetic potency. This led to
the Meyer–Overton “lipoid” hypothesis \[11\], which formulates that IAs
exert their eﬀects by changing the lipid solubility of neuronal cellular
membranes. This change in solubility leads to a nonspeciﬁc eﬀect that
alters the activity of molecules embedded in the membrane. Among those
molecules are ion channels that can change the membrane potential, and
thus the likelihood of neuronal depolarization. However, newer evidence
has shown that IAs interact directly with protein targets \[10\],
including direct inhibition of luciferase and other proteins that aﬀect
modulatory mechanisms linked to neurotransmitter receptors, neuronal ion
channels, and the cytoskeleton. A group of potassium channels (TREK-1)
were recently discovered that are strongly activated by IAs. The
importance of these channels in the mechanisms of general anesthesia is
evidenced by knockout TREK-1 animals that exhibit anesthetic resistance.
Recently, a novel mechanism of TREK-1 activation via disruption of
phospholipase D2 and disruption of lipid–protein domains, known as
“lipid rafts” \[12\], has been demonstrated \[13\]. This would represent
a direct eﬀect of IAs on membrane lipids and membrane proteins that then
exert eﬀects on ion channels – perhaps explaining Meyer and Overton’s
results from the last century.

Pharmacokinetics One of the most important pharmacokinetic
characteristics of IAs is the blood/gas partition coeﬃcient. This
coeﬃcient describes how the particles of each gas will distribute
between the alveoli and the blood after equilibrium has been achieved.
It aﬀects the anesthetic uptake, and therefore its onset of action, as
well as its clearance. Age, body mass index, gender, and hemoglobin do
not appear to have any eﬀect on the blood/gas coeﬃcient \[14\]. The
water/gas partition coeﬃcient of isoﬂurane is 0.59, sevoﬂurane 0.37, and
desﬂurane 0.27

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

78

Ricardo Diaz Milian

\[14\]. The higher the partition coeﬃcient, the higher the solubility
and potency of the IA. Higher solubility correlates inversely with onset
of anesthesia; therefore, the more soluble an IA is, the slower its
onset \[15\]. The partition coeﬃcients between the gas and blood, and
blood and brain (the target organ) are known and shown in Table 5.1.
Notice that isoﬂurane is the most soluble of the halogenated hydrocarbon
anesthetics, and therefore the most potent. This correlates with its
comparatively low minimum alveolar concentration (MAC). Inversely, it
also has the slowest onset of action. Clearance of IAs occurs almost
exclusively via the lungs, since liver metabolism of available modern
IAs is minimal \[16\]. Consequently, the most important factor in the
clearance of IAs is ventilation, and there is a direct correlation
between rate of clearance and ventilation. Theoretically, the lower the
blood/gas partition coeﬃcient of an anesthetic, the faster it should be
cleared. However, this assumption is not supported by clinical evidence
\[17\]. The duration of administration of an IA also correlates directly
with the rate of clearance \[18\]. An increase in the alveolar
concentration of an IA can occur when it is used concomitantly with a
gas with a high uptake rate (nitrous oxide). This phenomenon is known as
the second gas eﬀect. Conversely, during emergence, nitrous oxide is
quickly removed from the circulation and it increases the clearance of
other gases \[19\]. Oxygen is one of such gases, and therefore,
emergence of nitrous oxide anesthesia can be complicated by hypoxemia.
Consequently, administration of 100% inhaled oxygen is recommended after
the administration of nitrous oxide anesthesia.

Nitrous Oxide (N2O) Nitrous oxide is a natural gas with analgesic and
anesthetic properties. It is the least potent of the IAs \[20\]. Owing
to its low solubility, it has a rapid uptake and this property is
utilized to facilitate the rapid uptake of other IAs. Another
consequence of this property is the displacement of other gases in body

Table 5.1 Pharmacokinetic properties of inhalational anesthetics Agent

Blood:gas PC

Brain:blood PC

MAC

Isoﬂurane

1.4

2.6

1.2

Desﬂurane

0.42

1.3

6.0

Sevoﬂurane

0.65

1.7

2.0

PC, partition coeﬃcient; MAC, minimum alveolar coeﬃcient.Source: Adapted
from Sakai et al. \[24\].

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Inhalational Anesthetics

79

compartments, including oxygen in the lungs; this is known as diﬀusion
hypoxia. Nitrous oxide can cause hematopoietic adverse reactions and
teratogenicity. However, the clinical signiﬁcance in humans is debatable
and seems to be neglibile \[20\].

Sevoﬂurane \[CH2 F-O-CH(CF3)2\] Sevoﬂurane is a ﬂuorinated
methyl-isopropyl ether, liquid at room temperature, that lacks odor and
is not pungent \[21\]. This characteristic makes it the ideal IA for
inhalational induction of general anesthesia. Sevoﬂurane undergoes
degradation into oleﬁn compounds (hydrocarbons), named compounds A, B,
C, and D \[21\]. Compound A is generated when sevoﬂurane is administered
in a semi-closed circuit with high-alkali-containing carbon dioxide as a
scavenger, especially when used at low fresh gas ﬂows \[22\]. Compound A
has been shown to cause renal damage in animals. However, this is likely
of no clinical signiﬁcance in humans \[21, 22\].

Isoﬂurane (CHF2-O-CHCl-CF3) Isoﬂurane is a diﬂuoromethyl ether that is
pungent and associated with airway irritation \[23\]. Isoﬂurane is more
soluble in tissues than desﬂurane \[23\], a property that increases the
time of emergence from general anesthesia and is directly correlated
with the length of time of administration.

Desﬂurane (CF2 H-O-CFH-CF3) Desﬂurane is a ﬂuorinated methyl-ethyl ether
and the least soluble of potent IAs \[21\]. It is liquid at room
temperature and exists as a combination of two isomers with similar
biological activity \[21\]. It is the only widely used anesthetic that
requires a special vaporizer with external heating for accurate dosing.
This is because at room temperature its vapor pressure is similar to the
atmospheric pressure. Therefore, a standard vaporizer would deliver
inaccurate doses of the gas at that temperature \[21\]. Desﬂurane has
the lowest lipid-to-blood solubility; this property has the hypothetical
advantage of lessening fat absorption of the drug in obese patients
\[24\]. This should equate to faster emergence of anesthesia after long
surgeries (&gt;2 hours). However, clinical studies have demonstrated
only modest diﬀerence in emergence timing, compared to sevoﬂurane and
isoﬂurane \[24\]. Due to its pungency, desﬂurane is not an appropriate
anesthetic to use for induction of general anesthesia.

Adverse Reactions Like all drugs, IAs have the potential to cause
adverse reactions, including lifethreatening complications. This
underscores the importance of an in-depth understanding of the
pharmacology of these drugs by anesthesiologists. Some

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

80

Ricardo Diaz Milian

adverse eﬀects are common to all modern IAs. All IAs cause postoperative
nausea and vomiting, albeit to a diﬀerent extent. Similarly, all modern
ﬂuorinated hydrocarbon anesthetics cause hypotension by decreasing
vascular tone. It is important to appreciate that although volatile
anesthetics are associated with adverse reactions, they remain very
important agents for maintenance of anesthesia. Perhaps the most
important reason that IAs remain the most common drugs utilized for this
objective is the ability to continuously monitor their exhaled
concentration. Consequently, they are considered protective against the
very important complication of intraoperative awareness. When total
intravenous anesthesia is used as an alternative to IAs, patients are at
a tenfold increase risk of this complication \[25\].

Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting Both ﬂuorinated hydrocarbons and
nitrous oxide produce postoperative nausea and vomiting in an exposure
time-dependent fashion \[26\]. Total intravenous anesthesia, in
comparison, is associated with a lower risk of postoperative nausea and
vomiting \[26\].

Nitrous Oxide and Eﬀects on Cavities The most important consideration
for the use of nitrous oxide is its potential to expand physiologic and
pathologic formed air-ﬁlled cavities. Therefore, nitrous oxide should be
avoided, or used with caution, in patients with pneumothorax,
pneumocephalus, pneumomediastinum, pulmonary blebs, and bowel
obstruction with dilated bowel loops. The mechanism by which nitrous
oxide causes this expansion is explained by the rate at which the gas
can enter a cavity. Nitrous oxide is more soluble than air, and
therefore, its uptake into the blood is reduced after it enters a
cavity. The result is that the cavity expands in a time-dependent
fashion \[27\]. Due to this time dependency, short administration of
nitrous oxide is likely acceptable in some of these conditions.

Unwanted Physiological Eﬀects of Fluorinated Hydrocarbons Intracellular
biological processes that are aﬀected by anesthetics include
mitochondrial energy production, cytoskeletal structural formation, and
the function of ion channels \[10\]. Modern halogenated IAs can cause
expected, but adverse, physiological eﬀects, including hypotension,
increase in heart rate, QT interval prolongation, decreased tidal volume
and increased respiratory frequency, and airway irritation. Rarely, they
can also cause increased intracranial pressure. Older IAs are linked to
hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. There are no reported cases of either
complication with currently used IAs.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Inhalational Anesthetics

81

Malignant Hyperthermia All volatile anesthetics, with the exception of
nitrous oxide, are considered trigger agents for malignant hyperthermia
(MH) \[28\]. MH is a rare, but potentially lethal, hypermetabolic
reaction to anesthesia. It is characterized by hypercapnia that is
refractory to aggressive ventilation, muscle rigidity, hyperthermia,
metabolic acidosis, electrolyte imbalances, cardiac arrhythmias, and
death. Patients with an MH episode and their families are at risk of
developing an episode of MH. Therefore, IAs are not to be used in
patients who are at risk (personal or family history of MH).

Nephrotoxicity and Hepatotoxicity Older IAs are associated with rare,
yet signiﬁcant, adverse reactions caused by products of their liver
metabolism. Methoxyﬂurane (discontinued) produces nephrotoxicity via the
ﬂuoride ion. Similarly, halothane is associated with fulminant hepatitis
by triﬂuoroacyl chloride, a metabolite produced by the drug’s liver
metabolism \[16\]. For this reason, the metabolism of modern anesthetics
has undergone exhaustive scrutiny. Modern anesthetics undergo minimal
liver metabolism, via cytochrome p450 enzymes, to toxic metabolites.
However, the concentrations produced clinically have failed to
demonstrate any signiﬁcant eﬀect. Of initial concern, compound A does
not seem to be linked to nephrotoxicity in humans.

Carbon Monoxide Toxicity All modern anesthetics produce carbon monoxide
when reacting with a desiccated carbon dioxide absorbent (scavenging
system) \[24\]. The production of carbon monoxide is likely related to
potency and is greater with desﬂurane than with isoﬂurane. Sevoﬂurane
produces negligible amounts of the toxic gas \[24\]. Care should be
taken to examine the state of the carbon dioxide absorbent to prevent
this complication, particularly in the ﬁrst case of the day. Accidental
ﬂow of gas through the anesthesia machine for prolonged periods of time
(e.g., weekends) enables desiccation of carbon dioxide absorbents.

Protective Eﬀects of Inhaled Anesthetics Several decades of basic
science research have supported the concept of anesthetic
preconditioning of the myocardium, a process where short periods of
ischemia provide protection against subsequent prolonged ischemia. This
had also been suggested by several meta-analyses that included patients
undergoing cardiac surgery. However, a recent randomized prospective
controlled trial that compared the use of total intravenous anesthesia
to IAs for maintenance of anesthesia in cardiac surgery failed to
demonstrate a mortality beneﬁt \[29\].

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

82

Ricardo Diaz Milian

Monitoring of Depth of Anesthesia The purpose of monitoring the depth of
anesthesia is to prevent memory formation during procedures
(intraoperative awareness). Intraoperative awareness is a dreaded
complication of general anesthesia that has an incidence of 0.1–0.2%
\[30\]. It can have devastating eﬀects on quality of life and can lead
to posttraumatic stress disorder. The gold standard for monitoring of
depth of anesthesia is continuous measurement of end-tidal concentration
of the anesthetic drug. This concentration can be utilized to determine
the ageadjusted MAC. The MAC (or MACM) of an anesthetic is deﬁned as the
minimal end-tidal concentration at which 50% of a population will not
move as a response to a surgical stimulus. Consequently, MAC values for
the ﬂuorinated hydrocarbon anesthetics are as follows: isoﬂurane 1.2,
desﬂurane 6.0, sevoﬂurane 2.0, and nitrous oxide 104 \[20, 24\].
Importantly, MAC values are additive (e.g., 0.5 MAC of sevoﬂurane + 0.5
MAC of desﬂurane = 1 MAC). IAs prevent movement by acting on both the
spinal cord and the brain \[31\] and they produce amnesia through their
direct eﬀects on the brain. Consequently, there is a MAC for movement
(MACM), and a MAC for awareness (MACA). MACA is the end-tidal
concentration of an anesthetic at which 50% of a population do not
remember events during anesthesia. The necessary concentration to
prevent awareness is signiﬁcantly lower than the concentration needed to
prevent movement and is generally accepted to be around 0.3 of MACM. At
twice this concentration, or 0.6 MACM, 99% of the individuals will not
form memories. A general recommendation is to keep anesthetized patients
at 0.7 MAC, to prevent intraoperative awareness. It is important to
consider the factors that aﬀect the MAC of anesthetics. The most
important factor that predictably aﬀects MAC is age. Increased age
decreases MAC by a factor of 7% per decade above 40 years of age.
Conversely, MAC increases by the same factor of 7% each decade below 40
years of age, peaking at the age of 6 months \[31\]. Temperature, sodium
concentration, and genetic makeup are other important variables that
aﬀect MAC \[31\]. Drugs that aﬀect MAC include intravenous anesthetics,
which decrease MAC. Opioids are known to reduce MAC; however, this needs
to be carefully interpreted. Opioids can reduce MACM by inhibition of
movement by acting on receptors in the spine. However, this mechanism
lacks amnestic eﬀects on the brain and it is known that they do not
aﬀect MACA. Consequently, they should not be relied on to prevent
awareness. Central nervous system (CNS) stimulants, including cocaine
and amphetamines, increase MAC during an acute intoxication; however,
chronic use decreases MAC \[31\]. Acute ethanol intoxication, a CNS
depressant, causes a decrease in MAC. Nevertheless, chronic use
decreases MAC requirements. Chronic use of other CNS depressants,
including benzodiazepines and antiepileptics, increases MAC requirements
and is a risk factor for intraoperative awareness.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Inhalational Anesthetics

83

Brain activity monitors (BAIs) utilize raw electroencephalographic data
to calculate a dimensionless number that indicates whether the patient
is anesthetized or at risk of intraoperative awareness. Multiple trials
have addressed the question of performance superiority between
age-adjusted MAC and BAIs in preventing episodes of intraoperative
awareness. The ﬁrst randomized controlled trial suggested superiority of
BAIs over MAC; however, the study design was limited by concerns of the
Hawthorne eﬀect in the BAI group \[32\]. Subsequent studies have
addressed that concern and found no diﬀerence between MAC and BAI
performance \[33, 34\]. Due to this limitation of BAIs, age-adjusted MAC
remains the gold standard measurement to monitor anesthetic depth when
using IAs for maintenance of anesthesia.

Conclusion IAs currently in use include a naturally occurring gas and
three ﬂuorinated hydrocarbons. The exact mechanism of action of these
drugs is yet to be elucidated. The most important pharmacokinetic
property of these drugs is the blood/air partition coeﬃcient, as it
determines their anesthetic potency. Adverse reactions that are
relatively common include postoperative nausea and vomiting and
hypotension. Rare, life-threatening complications can also occur, the
most important being MH. However, they remain to be the most commonly
used drugs for maintenance of anesthesia due to their reliability and
the ability to monitor their alveolar concentration.

References 1. Whalen FX, Bacon DR, Smith HM. Inhaled anesthetics: an
historical overview. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol.
2005;19(3):323–30. DOI: 10.1016/j.bpa.2005.02.001. 2. Chaturvedi R,
Gogna RL. Ether day: an intriguing history. Med J Armed Forces India.
2011;67(4):306–8. DOI: 10.1016/S0377-1237(11)60098-1. 3. Lew V, McKay E,
Maze M. Past, present, and future of nitrous oxide. Br Med Bull.
2018;125(1):103–19. DOI: 10.1093/bmb/ldx050. 4. Holmes CMK. The
Manhattan legacy. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2007;35(Suppl. 1):17–20. DOI:
10.1177/0310057x0703501s03. 5. Terrell RC. The invention and development
of enﬂurane, isoﬂurane, sevoﬂurane, and desﬂurane. Anesthesiology.
2008;108(3):531–3. DOI: 10.1097/aln.0b013e31816499cc. 6. Lynch C. Meyer
and Overton revisited. Anesth Analg. 2008;107(3):864–7. DOI:
10.1213/ane.0b013e3181706c7e. 7. Eger EI. New inhaled anesthetics.
Anesthesiology. 1994;80(4):906–22.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.006 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

6

Intravenous Anesthetics and Adjunctive Agents Matthew M. Colontonio,
Mitchell C. Fuller, Harish Bangalore Siddaiah, Shilpa Patil, and Alan
David Kaye

Introduction Intravenous (IV) anesthetics were ﬁrst discovered for their
clinical utility in 1656 by Sir Christopher Wren, an architect,
physicist, and astronomer at the University of Oxford, while using a
goosequill to inject opium into a dog to produce sleep \[1\]. In 1909,
Ludwig Burkhardt became the ﬁrst surgeon to deliberately use IV ether in
a 5% solution to sedate patients for head and neck surgery, ﬁnding that
a higher concentration caused thrombophlebitis and hemolysis, whereas a
lower concentration proved too weak a sedative. The ﬁrst barbiturate
hexobarbital was used in 1932, soon being used for over 10 million cases
by 1944. In 1989, the ﬁrst propofol lipid emulsion formulation was
launched in the United States, marking the beginning of the modern age
of IV sedation pharmacology \[2\]. Inhaled anesthetics were commonplace
in the operative theatre long before IV use, although IV propofol is
used in nearly all operations today, which is estimated to be 300
million annually \[3\]. Propofol, along with volatile anesthetic agents,
are the main components of present-day general anesthesia, accounting
for a multitude of advantageous outcomes in clinical practice and
perioperative medicine \[4\]. A current high-powered meta-analysis found
that the three biggest beneﬁts of propofol-based total IV anesthesia
(TIVA) included decreased risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting
(PONV), lower pain scores (i.e., high patient satisfaction), and
decreased time in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) \[4\]. Another
meta-analysis of over 4000 subjects investigating the superior safety
proﬁle of TIVA found low-quality evidence that propofol-based TIVA
decreases the likelihood of postoperative cognitive dysfunction (e.g.,
postoperative delirium) \[5\]. This ﬁnding was of particular interest to
geriatric surgery, which boasts a higher risk of postoperative delirium
and has an increasing incidence of surgery each year. IV anesthetic
repurposing is emerging for classic disease processes such as sedation
for the coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) procedure and sedation with
etomidate for endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). For
example, volatile anesthetics such as sevoﬂurane have long been the
mainstay anesthetic agent for CABG procedures; yet emerging evidence 86

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Intravenous Anesthetics and Adjunctive Agents

87

suggests that propofol-based TIVA is noninferior \[6\]. On another note,
ERCP has long been performed under propofol-based TIVA; yet use of
etomidate is now validated as a safe alternative \[7\]. Additionally, a
new frontier of IV anesthetic use is rapidly emerging for clinical
entities such as depression and status epilepticus. Ketamine, an
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist, is becoming a well-accepted
alternative pharmacotherapy in treatment-resistant depression and
nonsuicidal self-injurious behavior \[8, 9\]. This is a novel and
impactful discovery in an age of increasing mental disease. And the list
of IV agents for treatment of refractory status epilepticus now boasts
midazolam, propofol, pentobarbital, thiopental, and ketamine \[10\]. As
exciting new pharmacotherapies are decreasing perioperative morbidity,
we review barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ketamine, etomidate,
dexmedetomidine, and propofol in this article as mainstay anesthesia
agents. In addition, the adjunctive use of perioperative multimodal
therapy, including opioids, local anesthetics, midazolam, and
dexmedetomidine, is discussed. Finally, we will review in detail the
inclusion of TIVA and adjunctive agents in Enhanced Recovery After
Surgery (ERAS) protocols, a niche of anesthesia that is becoming widely
popular in the United States.

Intravenous Anesthetic Agents The hunt continues for the ideal IV agent.
There are currently several options that are in clinical practice that
all serve their own purpose; however, not one single agent has been able
to encompass all ideal eﬀects. The ideal IV anesthetic would provide
amnesia with ultrarapid action, causing little to no cardiorespiratory
depression, with concurrent ultrarapid metabolism. In addition to the
aforementioned characteristics, the IV agent would be highly potent,
reversible, stable in formulation, void of irritants, aﬀordable, and
easy to administer \[11\]. IV agents also have innumerable techniques of
use, including, but not limited to, premedication, induction of general
anesthesia, sedation for procedures and monitored anesthesia care (MAC)
cases, and treatments of ailments including seizures, pain, and PONV.
Further speciﬁc indications and uses are described, categorized by
medication, below. As seen below in Table 6.1, the majority of IV
anesthetics used today have targets of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
receptor modulation. With a primary objective of increasing GABA’s
eﬃciency, this mechanism occurs via GABA potentiation, as well as via
inhibition of counteracting and excitatory neurotransmission of
glutamate \[12, 13\]. If large boluses of these types of medications
with this action are administered, they can cause burst suppression on
electroencephalography (EEG) and act as an anticonvulsant, with the
exception of methohexital.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

IV, IM, IN, PO, PR, SL, B IV, IN

GABAA

GABAA

GABAA

α2-agonism

Propofol

Etomidate

Benzodiazepines

Dexmedetomidine

Redistribution

Redistribution

Redistribution

Redistribution

Redistribution

Redistribution

Distribution

Rapid hepatic conjugation, N-methylation, hydroxylation

Glucuronidation to watersoluble

Conjugation, extrahepatic metabolism

CYP P450, plasma esterases

Hepatic, N-demethylation

Hepatic oxidation to watersoluble, N-dealkylation, desulfuration

Biotransformation

IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; PO, per os; PR, per rectal; IN,
intranasal; SC, subcutaneous; E, epidural; SL, sublingual; B, buccal.
Source: Adapted from \[11\], \[13\], and \[15\].

IV

IV

IV, IM, IN, PO, SC, E

NMDA antagonist

Ketamine

IV, IM, PO PR

GABAA

Absorption

Barbiturates

MOA

Table 6.1 Mechanisms of action/pharmacokinetics

Renal, bile

Renal

Renal

Renal

Renal

Renal, bile (methohexital)

Excretion

Intravenous Anesthetics and Adjunctive Agents

89

Regarding pharmacokinetics, all IV anesthetics share very similar
properties. Their distribution throughout the body is determined by
blood ﬂow to vessel-rich organs (brain, heart, kidneys, liver), before
transitioning to muscles, with eventual deposition in vessel-poor
tissues (fat, bone) \[13\]. Their metabolism is considerably hepatic,
with renal excretion, though there are exceptions (see Table 6.1). The
more lipid-soluble the anesthetic, the more readily it crosses the
blood–brain barrier (BBB), which implies a faster onset of action.
Dosing for IV anesthetics can range based on the desired eﬀect, as shown
in Table 6.2; the various organ eﬀects are shown in Table 6.3.
Naturally, IV agents that contain irritants or stabilizing agents, such
as propylene glycol or phenols, consequently cause pain on injection
\[14\], notably thiopental, diazepam, lorazepam, propofol, and
etomidate. All of the IV medications can be administered as a single
bolus versus an infusion, which will alter immediate organ eﬀects. If
considering an infusion, it is important to understand the concept of
context-sensitive half-life, which is discussed later in this chapter.
Context-sensitive half-life, or context-sensitive half-time, is deﬁned
as the time taken for blood plasma concentration of a drug to decline by
half after an infusion designed to maintain a steady state has been
stopped \[13\]. As shown in Figure 6.1, the context-sensitive half-times
of various IV agents are plotted against time. Context-sensitive
half-time can help predict when a drug is cleared and the patient is no
longer sedated by that respective agent. Barbiturates include
thiopental, thiamylal, methohexital, and phenobarbital. They work by
depressing the reticular activating system (RAS), directly potentiating
the gamma-aminobutyric acid-A (GABAA) receptor, prolonging the duration
of chloride channel opening. Historically, these agents served well as
induction agents for both pediatric and adult anesthetics; however, with
the advent of propofol, their routine use has decreased. Barbiturates
treat raised intracranial pressure (ICP) and may be beneﬁcial as
neuroprotective agents against ischemia during deep hypothermic
circulatory arrest, stroke, and aneurysm surgery. It is worth noting
that production of porphyrins is increased through stimulation of
aminolevulinic acid synthetase and therefore should be avoided in
patients with porphyria. Benzodiazepines include short-acting (midazolam
and triazolam), intermediate-acting (alprazolam, clonazepam, lorazepam,
oxazepam, temazepam), and long-acting (chlordiazepoxide, diazepam,
ﬂurazepam) agents. They work similarly to barbiturates, with
potentiation of the GABAA receptor, but diﬀerently by increasing the
frequency of chloride channel opening. Benzodiazepines assist as an
excellent preoperative medication for anxiolysis, sedation, and
induction of anesthesia. As previously mentioned, they suppress seizure
activity by inhibiting GABA. Midazolam is the most commonly used
benzodiazepine in the operating room. Typically, 1–2 mg IV before
induction

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

b

a

0.5–1 μg kg−1 loadb, 0.3–0.7 μg/ (kg hr)

0.5–1 μg kg−1 IN

As an adjunct to volatiles. Over 15 minutes.Source: Adapted from \[11\],
\[13\], and \[15\].

Dexmedetomidine

Midazolam

N/A

0.1–0.4 mg kg−1

0.25–1 μg/ (kg min)a

0.2–0.5 mg kg−1 IV

0.1–0.2 mg kg−1 load, 0.05 mg kg−1 Q5 min PRN 0.01–0.1 mg kg−1

50–200 μg/ (kg min)

1–2.5 mg kg−1 IV

25–100 μg/ (kg min)

Propofol

0.02–0.15 mg kg−1 IV/IM 0.1–0.2 mg kg−1 PO

0.1–0.5 mg min−1

1-2 mg kg−1 IV 3-5 mg kg−1 IM

2.5–15 μg/(kg min)

Ketamine

Etomidate

50–150 μg/ (kg min)

Maintenance

1–2 mg kg−1 IV

2.5–5 mg kg−1

Induction

0.2–0.4 mg kg−1 IV

Sedation

Methohexital 1%

Thiopental

Premedication

Table 6.2 Dosing of anesthetics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

N/N

↓↓/V/ ↓a N ↓/V/↓ ↓/V/V

↓↓↓/↓↓↓/↓↓↓

↓↓↓/↓↓↓/↓↓↓

↓↓/↓↓/↓↓

N/N/V

Propofol

Etomidate

Benzodiazepines

Dexmedetomidine

N/N

N/N

N

N

↓↓↓/↓↓ N

N

N

↓/↓

Renal (RBF/GFR)

No GABA eﬀect

Most eﬀective anxiolytic

Transient inhibition of 11-β hydroxylase, myoclonic activity

No tolerance; however, PRIS

Closest to “ideal” IV agent as provides amnesia, analgesia, and
unconsciousness

Rate of administration can vary eﬀects dramatically, can precipitate
porphyria

Unique characteristics

Clinically insigniﬁcant. CBF, cerebral blood ﬂow; ICP, intracranial
pressure; CMRO2, cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen; BP, blood pressure;
HR, heart rate; CO, cardiac output; TV, tidal volume; RR, respiratory
rate; RBF, renal blood ﬂow; GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate; IV,
intravenous; N, no change, minimal, or oﬀsetting eﬀects; V, variable
eﬀect; PRIS, propofol infusion syndrome; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid.

a

(↓/↓)a

N

↑↑/↑↑/↑

Ketamine

↓↓/↓↓

↓/↑/N

↓↓↓/↓↓↓/↓↓↓↓

Barbiturates

Respiratory (TV/RR)

CV (BP/ HR/ CO)

Neuro (CBF/ICP/CMRO2)

Agents

Table 6.3 Organ eﬀects of anesthetics

Context-sensitive half-time (min)

92

M. M. Colontonio, M. C. Fuller, H. B. Siddaiah, et al.

200 Fentanyl

Thiopental

Diazepam 150

100

Dexmedetomidine Midazolam

50

Ketamine Propofol

Remifentanil 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Infusion duration (hours) Figure 6.1 Context-sensitive half-time eﬀects
of anesthetics. Source: Adapted from \[20\].

provides substantial anxiolytic eﬀects, and reduced dosage should be
considered in the elderly. Benzodiazepines have dose-dependent
respiratory depression and caution should be exercised when
co-administering opioids, as hypotension can occur in hemodynamically
unstable patients. Ketamine is an analog of phencyclidine, causing
dissociation of the thalamus from the limbic cortex. Ketamine works by
noncompetitive inhibition of the NMDA receptor. It is also the only
analgesic of IV agents discussed in this chapter that has weak opioid
agonist activity (μ &gt; κ &gt; δ). Additionally, it has properties of a
weak GABA agonist, adrenergic agonist (α1 and β2), and muscarinic
antagonist. Ketamine is a direct myocardial depressant, but an indirect
sympathomimetic. Ketamine is the only IV anesthetic that has low protein
binding \[15\]. Ketamine uses include induction of general anesthesia,
intramuscular use for uncooperative patients, for adults and children
without IV access, deep sedation, and newer ideas, including treatment
of treatment-resistant depression and refractory status epilepticus.
Ketamine can be helpful in diﬃcult airway cases, as respiratory function
appears to be preserved, though an antisialagogue should be considered.
Ketamine is a helpful aid in trauma patients, and is commonly used for
chest tube placement and bone reduction by orthopedic surgeons. It has
also been beneﬁcial as an adjunct to analgesia in the opioid-tolerant
patient. Ketamine should be avoided in the critically ill who have
exhausted their adrenergic capacity, in patients with severe right

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Intravenous Anesthetics and Adjunctive Agents

93

heart dysfunction due to increased pulmonary vascular resistance, and in
those with severe hypovolemia. Etomidate is another IV anesthetic, a
carboxylated imidazole, that depresses the RAS, with GABAA receptor
potentiation. Etomidate is notably dissolved in propylene glycol, which
is known to cause pain on injection. Myoclonus is very common after
administration, and there is dose-dependent inhibition of the
adrenocortical system via 11β-hydroxylase; however, no studies have
demonstrated an adverse eﬀect on outcome \[15\]. Common applications for
etomidate include deep sedation, as well as induction of general
anesthesia, especially in those with compromised cardiac function.
Propofol is a lipid emulsion formulation, standardized to 1% propofol,
10% soybean oil, and 1.2% puriﬁed egg phospholipid as an emulsiﬁer, with
2.25% glycerol as a tonicity-adjusting agent and sodium hydroxide to
adjust the pH \[16\]. Bacterial retardants are added, as the
above-mentioned formulation supports bacterial growth. Propofol should
be used immediately or at least within 6 hours of vial opening \[15\].
It is the most commonly used IV anesthetic that currently exists in
clinical practice \[15\]. It is also easily titratable and commonly used
for maintenance of intraoperative and postoperative sedation. Children
will typically require higher doses. Low-dose propofol can be used for
central line placement, as well as as an alternative agent for PONV. If
given in high-dose infusions for an extended period of time, propofol
can cause propofol infusion syndrome (PRIS), which presents with
metabolic acidosis, hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, and renal
failure. Dexmedetomidine is a highly selective α2-adrenergic agonist,
approximately eight times more speciﬁc than clonidine, with 1620:1 α2/α1
receptor favorability \[17\]. By stimulating α2 receptors in the locus
ceruleus, there is a decrease in norepinephrine release. Action on the
descending noradrenergic pathways inhibits norepinephrine release and
inhibits pain transmission at the dorsal horn of the spinal cord \[18,
19\]. Dexmedetomidine has been used extensively as a nonopioid adjuvant
for perioperative pain relief. Because of the central and peripheral
receptors, dexmedetomidine can have a paradoxical eﬀect on hemodynamics.
Upon bolus administration, due to α1 activity, hypertension may result,
which is avoided with a loading dose over 15 minutes. At peak eﬀect of
an infusion, hypotension and bradycardia are generally present.
Dexmedetomidine has minimal to no respiratory depression, and therefore
has been useful in sedation. Common applications include sedation for
MAC and intensive care unit (ICU) patients, and preventing emergence
delirium, as well as awakening from general anesthesia and ICU recovery
\[11\]. Signiﬁcant attenuation of stress response to tracheal
intubation/extubation allows for assistance during awake ﬁberoptic
techniques. Dexmedetomidine reduces minimal alveolar concentration, and
therefore reduces opioid, muscle relaxant, and inhalational anesthetic
requirements.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

94

M. M. Colontonio, M. C. Fuller, H. B. Siddaiah, et al.

Novel Intravenous Agents Attempts are being made for improvement in IV
drug proﬁle. More favorable characteristics would include less or no
pain on injection, more predictable and consistent termination of
action, and drug utility irrespective of, and unbound by, renal or liver
failure. Shockingly, drug development approaches almost \$3 billion
dollars, with only roughly 12% approval rate for entering clinical
development \[21\]. Although newer formulations are in the pipeline,
drug development is not inexpensive. Most current drugs in the
development process share and emulate existing formulations with slight
modiﬁcations to their structures. However, not all of these agents have
been successful, and some have already been removed from the market.
These agents include fospropofol, novel propofol formulations (and
micro- to macro-emulsions), remimazolam, cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl
metomidate, methoxycarbonyl etomidate, and AZD 3043. Fospropofol is a
prodrug of propofol appearing to allay microbial concerns, as well as
causing decreased pain on injection as it is water-soluble. Fospropofol
used in endoscopic procedures is approved for use of MAC sedation, not
general anesthesia. However, fospropofol does have a longer onset of
action, and therefore has less precision upon administration.
Remimazolam is an amnestic that has a similar onset time to midazolam
and remifentanil. Because it is metabolized by tissue esterases, no
concerns about accumulation of the products are warranted.
Cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl metomidate also appears to be demonstrating
some early promise in animal studies \[11\]. The less potent brother of
etomidate has a shorter duration of action and less adrenocortical
suppression. It is metabolized by blood and tissue esterases, but the
drug remains in early clinical trials.

Adjuvant Agents Adjuvants are medications that can be administered in
smaller doses when used in combination to achieve maximum beneﬁts while
minimizing side eﬀects \[22\]. Multimodal general anesthesia utilizes
the advantage of various drug combinations targeting diﬀerent sites in
the nociceptive pathway and arousal systems \[22\]. As previously
discussed, the ideal IV agent would fulﬁll many characteristics, but
adjuvants can supplement those gaps. Adjuvant agents include
antiinﬂammatories, analgesics, and local anesthetics, which will be
discussed heavily in their respective chapter, but also gabapentin and
magnesium. This chapter will also discuss below adjuvant use in
conjunction with regional anesthetics. Ketorolac is a nonsteroidal
antiinﬂammatory drug (NSAID) that acts by inhibiting cyclooxygenase-1
and 2 (COX-1 and COX-2), which decreases the production of
prostaglandins. Prostaglandins are produced in response to

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Intravenous Anesthetics and Adjunctive Agents

95

tissue damage, leading to inﬂammation and pain. Ketorolac is a potent
analgesic that is recommended for moderate to severe pain and a very
useful IV adjuvant in attempts to spare the use of opioids. Ketorolac is
typically used for a short period of time to avoid gastrointestinal
bleeding and damage to the kidneys. Though the intramuscular route is an
option, IV dosing includes 15– 30 mg every 6 hours, but not exceeding
60–120 mg a day (dependent on kidney function). Acetaminophen is
produced in many formulations, and the mechanism of action remains
unknown. It is suggested that it works similarly to ketorolac in that it
decreases the production of prostaglandins, though likely a more central
process than with NSAIDs, which work at the site of tissue damage.
Acetaminophen is beneﬁcial in treating mild to moderate pain and should
be used as an adjuvant to analgesia in the anesthetic. Rectal and oral
routes are commonly used successfully in pediatric analgesics. However,
IV dosing includes 15 mg kg−1 (not to exceed 75 mg kg−1 per day in
children &lt;12 years old), given over 15–30 minutes every 6 hours, but
not exceeding 4 g, with caution in those with liver disease. Opioids act
primarily at several receptors (μ, κ, δ) and prevent nociceptive
transmission at the level of the spinal cord, brain, and peripheral
nociceptors. Their action is mediated via the G protein-coupled receptor
mechanism, causing hyperpolarization of aﬀerent sensory neurons
\[22–24\]. They are often used as adjuvants with local anesthetics to
prolong the duration and quality of postoperative analgesia \[23\].
Table 6.4 provides dosing through diﬀerent sites of administration for
diﬀerent opioids. Advantages include eﬀective analgesia, diminished
hemodynamic stress response to noxious stimuli, facilitation of airway
manipulation by blunting of cough and gag reﬂexes, and synergistic
eﬀects, and thereby dose reduction, when given along with other IV
induction agents \[25\]. Adverse eﬀects include respiratory depression,
sedation, nausea, vomiting, muscle rigidity, constipation, ileus,
pruritus, urinary retention, and addiction and dependence. Individual
opioids are discussed more thoroughly in their respective chapter.
Lidocaine is a commonly used local anesthetic agent given IV for
decreasing the sympathetic response to intubation and extubation. Local
anesthetics decrease the minimum alveolar concentration, subsequently
augmenting the eﬀects of other agents. It is also commonly used as
pretreatment to decrease pain on injection with propofol and etomidate.
Lidocaine acts by blocking sodium channels and preventing conduction of
action potentials in peripheral nerves. As an adjuvant, it can be used
in the form of an infusion for perioperative pain relief. Infusions can
start with or without a loading dose and range from 1 to 3 mg/(kg hr)
\[28\]. When providing an infusion, close monitoring for cardio- and
neurotoxicity is paramount. Toxicity may present in the intubated
patient as cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, and seizures.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fentanyl

Morphine

Name of the drug

Intravenous patient-controlled analgesia (for opioid-naïve patients)
Conc: 1 mg mL−1 Demand dose: 0.5–2 mg Maximum: 7.5 mg hr−1 Lockout: 5–10
min Conc: 10 μg mL−1 Demand dose: 5– 20 μg Maximum: 75 μg hr−1 Lockout:
4–10 min

Intravenous

0.03–0.15mgkg−1: for postoperative analgesia

0.5–1.5 μg kg−1: for postoperative analgesia

Table 6.4 Opioids as adjuvants

10–25 µg

100–200 µg

Intrathecal

1–5 mg

Epidural

No

No

Peripheral nerve block

Hydrophilic and more widespread analgesia

Comments

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

0.3 mg

Buprenorphine (opioid agonist– μ-antagonist–κ)

Source: Adapted from \[23\] and \[25–27\].

Tramadol

0.01–0.02 mg kg: for postoperative analgesia

−1

0.25–20 μg kg−1: for intraoperative analgesia

Hydromorphone

Sufentanil

Conc: 0.2 mg mL−1 Demand dose: 0.2– 0.4 mg Maximum: 1.5 mg hr−1 Lockout
interval: 6– 10 min

10–50 mg

75–150 µg

100 µg

1.5–5 μg

1–2 mg kg−1

150–300 μg

500–600 μg

0.75– 1 μg mL−1

0.3 mg

Lipophilic, ceiling eﬀect on respiratory depression due to partial
agonist property

98

M. M. Colontonio, M. C. Fuller, H. B. Siddaiah, et al.

Magnesium is a less commonly nonopioid strategy used despite its
analgesic and sedative eﬀects. The proposed mechanism of action includes
competitive and noncompetitive NMDA antagonism at the hippocampal
presynaptic calcium channels, which regulate aspartate and glutamate
\[29\]. Both pathways are thought to contribute to the prevention of
central sensitization \[29\]. Though magnesium is making waves as a
revival, there is substantial variability in dosing. Dosing generally
includes a 30–50 mg kg−1 load, followed by an infusion of 6–25 mg/(kg
hr). Fortunately, magnesium is forgiving due to its large therapeutic
window, though toxicity risks remain and patients should be monitored
closely for risks of hypermagnesemia \[29\]. Gabapentin is an
anticonvulsant that is a structural analog of GABA but acts at the α–2δ
subunit of presynaptic P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channels \[30\].
Gabapentin is also less frequently used in the operating room but does
play a small role in adjuvant therapy. Gabapentin dosing also varies due
to lack of evidence over eﬀective dosing. Gabapentin likely works by
decreasing the analgesic requirements due to neuropathic pain relief.
More studies need to be performed to demonstrate consistent responses
and eﬀective dosing for optimal analgesia. IV anesthetics and adjuncts
have also been trialed in the ﬁeld of regional anesthesia. Regional
techniques have proven beneﬁts in alleviating postoperative pain and
decreasing the amount of narcotics used in the perioperative period. By
decreasing the amount of opioids used, there is decreased PONV and
adverse eﬀects. With pain being a common obstruction to discharge from
PACU, regional techniques have drastically become a necessity. IV
anesthetics have been combined with various peripheral nerve blocks and
neuraxial techniques in anticipation of superior eﬀects. This includes
addition of opioids, benzodiazepines, dexmedetomidine, and other
adjuvants to local anesthetics, including epinephrine and sodium
bicarbonate. For example, dexmedetomidine prolongs the sensory/ motor
block duration and decreases the requirement for rescue analgesics when
used as an adjuvant with local anesthetics in epidural and regional
blocks.

Incorporation of Intravenous Anesthetics in ERAS Protocols ERAS is an
evidence-based multimodal perioperative protocol directed towards stress
reduction, reduced morbidity, and promotion of return of function \[31,
32\]. The introduction of target-controlled infusion (TCI) regimes since
1989 has broadened the applicability of TIVA in clinical practice.
Beneﬁts of incorporation of ERAS protocols were investigated in a
retrospective study in single-level lumbar microdiscectomy by Kılıç et
al. They found that application of ERAS protocols was clinically, as
well as economically, beneﬁcial when compared to the subset of patients
who belonged to the preERAS group. This study highlights the beneﬁts of
use of

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Intravenous Anesthetics and Adjunctive Agents

99

ERAS protocols in terms of relatively shorter operation duration and
lesser blood loss, and therefore reduced requirement of crystalloid and
colloid administration. In addition, patients experienced improved pain
relief, early mobilization, reduced incidence of nausea/vomiting, and
overall reduced hospital stay \[33\]. In this review, TIVA using
fentanyl and propofol describes ease of titration, minimum stress
response, opioid-sparing eﬀect, lower risk of airway issues, and
facilitation of optimum surgical conditions \[33\]. Interestingly,
prediction of emergence and early extubation have been attempted in
patients undergoing video-assisted thoracotomy surgery (VATS) under
TIVA. A response surface equation to evaluate the eﬀect of combination
of drugs not only for anesthesia induction and maintenance, but also for
emergence, was utilized by Chiou et al. \[34\]. Fentanyl, propofol, and
rocuronium were used for induction and maintenance for the duration of
the procedure. The beneﬁts of early extubation in patients undergoing
thoracic surgery in reducing airway and pulmonary complications have
been extensively studied \[34, 35\]. Wang et al. described that TIVA
combined with thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA) plays a role in better
postoperative outcome, improved pulmonary function, better pain relief,
and early mobilization \[36\]. Opioids have been implicated in inducing
hyperalgesia, lowering pain threshold manifesting as tolerance to
opioids and abnormal pain symptoms in the form of allodynia \[37\]. To
this eﬀect, IV ketamine has been incorporated in ERAS protocols because
of its antihyperalgesia and antiinﬂammatory properties \[38\]. Ketamine
is useful in patients with chronic pain or chronic opioid use. This is
not only because of a reduction in central sensitization by NMDA
antagonism and reduction in opiate tolerance, but also because of the
balance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters \[39, 40\].
IV lidocaine infusion has been used widely for its analgesic,
antiinﬂammatory, and antihyperalgesic eﬀects \[39\]. Clonidine and
dexmedetomidine are also useful adjuncts that have been used for
analgesia in ERAS programs. Propofol is beneﬁcial for patients at high
risk of PONV. ERAS protocols for colorectal surgeries have been
extensively reviewed in several meta-analyses and randomized controlled
trials. The practice of following this protocol has demonstrated 40–50%
reduced morbidity and a reduction in length of hospital stay by 2–3 days
\[31, 41\]. Parrish et al. conducted a retrospective review from 14
centers in Southern California and found that implementing ERAS
protocols for ambulatory anorectal surgeries decreased postoperative
pain and unplanned emergency room return visits \[42\].

Use of Total Intravenous Anesthetics Propofol, midazolam, ketamine,
remifentanil, and dexmedetomidine are commonly used for TIVA. TIVA
involves use of medications IV for induction and maintenance of
anesthesia. It is commonly used in both adult and

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

100

M. M. Colontonio, M. C. Fuller, H. B. Siddaiah, et al.

pediatric populations, and those at risk of malignant hyperthermia. TIVA
is also heavily favored in neurosurgical cases when various
neuromonitoring techniques are the standard of care and where there is
potential for nerve injury during surgical resection. Pediatric patients
diﬀer from adults in several aspects. They have an increased volume of
distribution, a smaller size, higher fat metabolism and cardiac output,
and higher clearance. Infusions can be controlled manually or as
automated TCI. The availability of TCI pumps with data sets programmed
for pediatric age groups has been highly valuable, but caution should be
exercised in neonates, young infants, and obese and hemodynamically
unstable pediatric patients \[43\]. IV tubing dead space has to be borne
in mind while administering drugs IV. Propofol is better avoided in
patients with mitochondrial disease because of an increased risk of PRIS
and in those with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deﬁciency \[44\].
In addition to standard monitors and clinical judgment, processed EEG
monitoring is useful in titrating TIVA for prolonged procedures \[45\].

Advantages (See reference \[45\].) 1. Optimum surgical conditions and
preferred when airway is shared, e.g., bronchoscopy or laryngoscopy. 2.
Prevention of PONV, especially with propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol). 3.
Reduced airway responsiveness and prevention of stridor, bronchospasm,
and laryngospasm at induction or emergence, more so in children with
reactive airway disease. 4. Improved ciliary function and less airway
irritation. 5. Smooth emergence, quicker recovery, and prevention of
emergence delirium. 6. Reduced environmental pollution. 7. Absolute
indication in patients with a history of/at risk of malignant
hyperthermia. 8. Suitable for use in patients with neuromuscular disease
and muscular dystrophy/myopathy, and reduces postoperative problems by
avoiding the use of neuromuscular blocking agents. 9. Children with
phobia about face mask. 10. Propofol and remifentanil combination is
preferred while monitoring spinal cord function with sensory or motor
evoked potential during corrective surgery for scoliosis \[43\]. 11.
Suitable for radiological investigations or procedures.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Intravenous Anesthetics and Adjunctive Agents

101

Disadvantages 1. Need for IV access and specialized equipment such as
infusion pumps. 2. Need for special equipment for reliable depth of
anesthesia. 3. Concern for PRIS with higher rates of infusion (&gt;4
mg/(kg hr)) over prolonged periods (&gt;48 hours). PRIS is characterized
by acute refractory bradycardia culminating in asystole and associated
with one or more of metabolic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria,
lipemia, or fatty liver enlargement \[43\]. 4. Bacterial contamination
risk.

Conclusion In summary, IV drugs are the mainstay of anesthesia practice.
They work to produce pain relief, sedation, anxiolysis, and amnesia in
highly dynamic and complex patients undergoing surgery. It is critical
that IV anesthetics are considered as a single component of the
multimodal perioperative anesthesia plan, along with inhaled and
regional anesthetic approaches. ERAS protocols are increasingly
involving IV anesthesia, as studies show improved patient outcomes, in
addition to major economic beneﬁt. Emerging IV drugs such as
fospropofol, remimazolam, and cyclopropyl-methoxycarbonyl metomidate are
optimizing the landscape of IV anesthesia practice by allowing the
anesthesiologist to give quick on/oﬀ sedation and analgesia. The future
of clinical anesthesia will continue to rely heavily on IV therapy and
on the drugs covered in this review.

Review Questions 1. An example of a barbiturate anesthetic is: (a)
Ketamine (b) Methohexital (c) Etomidate (d) Midazolam 2. An advantage of
remimazolam is: (a) It is metabolized by tissue esterases and therefore,
there is no concern over accumulation of metabolites (b) It is strongly
renally eliminated (c) It is a prodrug of midazolam (d) It has a longer
duration than alprazolam

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

102

M. M. Colontonio, M. C. Fuller, H. B. Siddaiah, et al.

3.  Dexmedetomidine:

<!-- -->

(a) Is a highly selective α2-adrenergic agonist and is approximately
    eight times more speciﬁc than clonidine
(b) Possesses both central and peripheral receptors
(c) Can have a paradoxical eﬀect on hemodynamics upon bolus
    administration
(d) Has minimal to no respiratory depression and therefore has been
    useful in sedation
(e) All of the above

Answers 1. (b) 2. (a) 3. (e)

References 1. Roberts M, Jagdish S. A history of intravenous anesthesia
in war (1656–1988). J Anesth Hist. 2016;2(1):13–21. 2. Baker MT, Naguib
M. Propofol: the challenges of formulation. Anesthesiology.
2005;103(4):860–76. 3. Weiser TG, Regenbogen SE, Thompson KD, et al. An
estimation of the global volume of surgery: a modelling strategy based
on available data. Lancet. 2008;372 (9633):139–44. 4. Schraag S,
Pradelli L, Alsaleh AJO, et al. Propofol vs. inhalational agents to
maintain general anaesthesia in ambulatory and in-patient surgery: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Anesthesiol. 2018;18(1):162. 5.
Miller D, Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, et al. Intravenous versus inhalational
maintenance of anaesthesia for postoperative cognitive outcomes in
elderly people undergoing non-cardiac surgery. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2018;8(8):CD012317. 6. Landoni G, Lomivorotov VV, Nigro Neto C, et
al. Volatile anesthetics versus total intravenous anesthesia for cardiac
surgery. N Engl J Med. 2019;380(13):1214–25. 7. Park CH, Park SW, Hyun
B, et al. Eﬃcacy and safety of etomidate-based sedation compared with
propofol-based sedation during ERCP in low-risk patients: a
double-blind, randomized, noninferiority trial. Gastrointest Endosc.
2018;87(1):174–84. 8. Tadler SC, Mickey BJ. Emerging evidence for
antidepressant actions of anesthetic agents. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol.
2018;31(4):439–45. 9. Mathew SJ, Shah A, Lapidus K, et al. Ketamine for
treatment-resistant unipolar depression: current evidence. CNS Drugs.
2012;26(3):189–204.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.007 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

7

Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics Chang H. Park and Garrett W. Burnett

Introduction Cocaine, derived from the coca leaf indigenous to South
America, was the ﬁrst drug to be utilized as a topical local anesthetic
by Dr. Carl Koller for glaucoma surgery in 1884. Dr. William Stewart
Halstead and Dr. Richard John Hall were the ﬁrst to demonstrate nerve
blockade with cocaine for dental surgery later in that same year. Due to
the undesirable eﬀects of cocaine, novocaine and subsequent other local
anesthetics were developed. Local anesthetics function through nerve
conduction blockade and provide surgical or perioperative analgesia.
Local anesthetics may be administered in a variety of routes, including
local subcutaneous inﬁltration, topical, neuraxial, or peripheral nerve
blockade, or intravenously. Each delivery method should be chosen based
on the clinical situation or the provider’s skill set.

Basics of Local Anesthetics Structure The basic structure of local
anesthetics includes a lipophilic aromatic ring and a hydrophilic
tertiary amine linked by either an amide or an ester linkage (see Figure
7.1). Local anesthetic types are therefore divided into ester local
anesthetics and amide local anesthetics, depending on their linkage.
Ester local anesthetics are rapidly metabolized by pseudocholinesterase
in plasma, whereas amide local anesthetics are metabolized by hepatic
microsomal enzymes. Examples of ester and amide local anesthetics are
shown in Table 7.1.

Mechanism of Action In order to understand the mechanism of action of
local anesthetics at the level of the nerves, it is important to
understand the physiology of nerve signals. Signal conduction in the
nervous system relies on propagation of an action potential via
depolarization of neuronal cell membranes. Depolarization can occur with
the opening of voltage-gated sodium channels in the neuronal membrane;
these voltage-gated sodium channels can exist in one of three 106

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Table 7.1 Common ester and amide local anesthetics with associated
characteristics Speed of onset

Duration of action

Maximum dose (mg kg−1)

Maximum dose (with epinephrine) (mg kg−1)

Esters Cocaine

+++

-   

1.5 (topical)

−

Benzocaine

+++

-   

−

−

Procaine

-   -   

7

10

Chloroprocaine

+++

-   

11

14

Amides Prilocaine

++

-   

6

8

Lidocaine

++

++

4.5

7

Mepivacaine

++

++

5

7

Bupivacaine

-   

+++

3

−

Ropivacaine

-   

+++

3

−

Maximum doses reported in the literature are shown, but it is important
to consider the route and location of administration when calculating
the maximum dosages of local anesthetics. +, least; +++, most.

ESTER

O C

O

R N

O N AROMATIC RING

AMIDE

R

C TERTIARY AMINE

Figure 7.1 Structure of local anesthetics, including an aromatic ring
group linked to a tertiary amine via an amide or ester linkage.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

108

Chang H. Park and Garrett W. Burnett

states: resting, open, or inactive. Voltage-gated sodium channels are in
the resting state at the neuron’s resting state (−70 mV). Initial
depolarization occurs when sodium channels are in the open state,
leading to an inﬂux of sodium ions into the cell. Upon reaching a
threshold potential (−55 mV), an action potential ﬁres and a signal is
propagated down the nerve’s axon (see Figure 7.2). Following an action
potential, the sodium channel repolarizes and the voltage-gated sodium
channels temporarily revert to an inactive state. This inactive state is
responsible for the refractory period in which a nerve signal cannot be
sent until the sodium channels return to their resting state. Local
anesthetics reversibly inhibit voltage-gated sodium channels and prevent
propagation of action potentials by preventing depolarization to the
threshold potential. Binding of local anesthetics to voltage-gated
sodium channels results in a sustained inactivated state. Voltage-gated
sodium channels are most susceptible to inhibition by local anesthetics
when in the open or inactivated state. Because of this preference for
the open or inactivated state, nerves which ﬁre more often are more
susceptible to local anesthetic eﬀects.

Membrane voltage

40 mV

–55 mV

Threshold potential

–70 mV Figure 7.2 Depolarization of a nerve to the threshold potential
leading to ﬁring of an action potential (grey). Local anesthetic limits
the nerve’s ability to reach the threshold potential (black). Following
a successful action potential, the refractory period leads to
hyperpolarization of the nerve prior to returning to the resting
potential of −90 mV. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published
online by Cambridge University Press

Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics

109

Nerve Fiber Sensitivity and Diﬀerential Blockade Local anesthetics do
not aﬀect all nerve ﬁber types identically. Diﬀerential blockade refers
to varied susceptibility to local anesthetic eﬀects among diﬀerent nerve
ﬁbers and may be responsible for pain signal blockade without motor
signal blockade. Typically, smaller nerves and myelinated nerves are
more susceptible to blockade by local anesthetics. Myelinated ﬁbers have
small gaps along their axons called the nodes of Ranvier. Three
consecutive nodes of Ranvier must be blocked to reliably block nerve
signal conduction. Autonomic nerves (C- and B-type ﬁbers) are often the
ﬁrst to be blocked by local anesthetics, followed by sensory and motor
nerves. Resolution of blockade follows the inverse of this pattern.

Pharmacodynamics Onset of action for local anesthetics is dependent on
the proportion of drug in the unionized form, as this form is able to
cross the neuronal membrane to bind the cytoplasmic side of the target
sodium channel (see Figure 7.3). This balance of unionized to ionized
local anesthetic is dependent on the drug’s pKa and the pH of the
environment in which the drug is located. The pKa is deﬁned as the pH at
which 50% of the drug is in the unionized form and the remaining 50% in
the ionized form. Most local anesthetics are weak bases with a pKa of
7.5–9.0, while physiologic pH is generally 7.35–7.45. The closer

Local anesthetic injection: BH+

BH+

B + H+ Na channel

Neuronal lipid membrane

X B+

H+

BH+

Figure 7.3 Local anesthetics exist in the water-soluble, unionized form
when injected. Local anesthetics must be in the ionized form to cross
the neuronal lipid membrane and bind to the eﬀector site (X) on the
cytoplasmic portion of the sodium (Na) channel. Local anesthetics with
pKa values closest to the pH of physiologic tissue will have greater
amounts of the ionized form. Local anesthetic binding to the Na channel
prevents Na inﬂux into the neuronal cell and subsequent action potential
propagation.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

110

Chang H. Park and Garrett W. Burnett

a drug’s pKa is to physiologic pH, the more the drug is in the unionized
form, which leads to a faster onset of action. The exception to this is
for drugs such as chloroprocaine, which has a higher pKa of 9.0 but is
rapid-acting due to the concentration at which it is administered (3%).
Local anesthetic potency is related to lipid solubility, a property
determined by the benzene ring of the drug. As lipid solubility of a
drug goes up, the greater the potency of that local anesthetic.
Additionally, molecular size impacts local anesthetic potency. This is
due to larger, more lipophilic drugs being more apt to cross the lipid
membrane of the cell to reach their target receptor. Common
concentrations of clinically available local anesthetics range from
0.25% to 4%, with more potent local anesthetics being prepared at lower
concentrations. Duration of action of local anesthetics is a property of
protein binding. Albumin and α1-acid-glycoprotein are the most common
proteins bound to local anesthetics. The more protein binding, the
longer the duration of action of the local anesthetic. Protein binding
is directly related to the pH of the environment, with decreased protein
binding in acidic environments. Additionally, more lipid-soluble drugs
are more likely to be bound to protein in blood; therefore, lipid
solubility and potency are associated with greater duration of action.
Additional considerations for duration of action of local anesthetics is
the rate of clearance of the drug from target sites. Local anesthetics
directly cause local vasodilation due to their eﬀects on smooth muscle,
which leads to decreased duration of action. To counter this, some
practitioners add vasoconstrictors, such as epinephrine, to the local
anesthetic to prolong the duration of action.

Pharmacokinetics Systemic absorption of local anesthetics varies on the
route of administration, as well as on the type of local anesthetic
used. See Table 7.2, which illustrates various levels of systemic
absorption of local anesthetics by route of administration. The local
anesthetic itself aﬀects systemic absorption, with local anesthetics
with high degrees of tissue binding (e.g., etidocaine, bupivacaine) or
larger volumes of distribution (e.g., prilocaine) having less systemic
absorption. Additionally, with larger total doses of local anesthetic,
there will be increased systemic absorption. The addition of
vasoconstrictors limits systemic absorption. For the same reason, it
increases the duration of action. Vasoconstrictors limit local blood
ﬂow. Following systemic absorption, local anesthetics are distributed to
organs with high levels of blood ﬂow such as the brain, heart, kidney,
or liver. Because of this distribution, toxic eﬀects of local
anesthetics will exert eﬀects on these systems.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics

111

Table 7.2 Systemic absorption of local anesthetics by route of
administration Systemic absorption of local anesthetics Intravenous
Tracheal Intercostal Caudal Epidural Brachial plexus Sciatic
Subcutaneous The intravenous route has the highest rate of systemic
absorption, whereas the subcutaneous route has the lowest rate of
systemic absorption.

Metabolism of local anesthetics is dependent on the type of local
anesthetic. Ester local anesthetics are rapidly metabolized by
pseudocholinesterase. Metabolism of the ester local anesthetics procaine
and benzocaine results in the formation of para-aminobenzoic acid
(PABA), which can result in anaphylaxis to both of these drugs. Amide
local anesthetics are metabolized by cytochrome p450 hepatic microsomal
enzymes and are therefore dependent on hepatic blood ﬂow and hepatic
function. Following metabolism of local anesthetics, their metabolites
are excreted via the kidneys.

Characteristics of Individual Local Anesthetic Agents Cocaine Cocaine
was the ﬁrst local anesthetic to be developed and has the unique
property of being the only local anesthetic with an intrinsic
vasoconstrictive eﬀect. It is most commonly administered topically in
head and neck surgery because of its unique combination of local
anesthetic and vasoconstrictor properties. Cocaine is typically
administered as a 4% solution. Toxic doses of cocaine must be avoided,
as this can result in a hypertensive crisis or

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

112

Chang H. Park and Garrett W. Burnett

myocardial ischemia. Due to these inherent risks associated with cocaine
toxicity, the clinical use of cocaine has become much less common, with
practitioners opting to use safer local anesthetics, such as lidocaine,
with vasoconstrictors such as phenylephrine.

Procaine Procaine was the ﬁrst synthetic local anesthetic to be
developed in order to address problems associated with cocaine. Procaine
use is limited due to its combination of short duration of action with
limited tissue penetration. It may be administered subcutaneously or as
a short-duration spinal anesthetic. Procaine is typically administered
as a 5% solution. It cannot be administered topically and has unreliable
results when administered via epidural or peripheral nerve injection. As
previously mentioned, procaine is metabolized to PABA, which is
responsible for procaine’s associated allergic reactions.

2-Chloroprocaine 2-Chloroprocaine is a rapidly acting local anesthetic
with a short duration of action of approximately 30–60 minutes. It is
more reliable than procaine for nerve conduction blockade and can be
used for spinal or epidural anesthesia, peripheral nerve blockade, and
subcutaneous injection. 2-Chloroprocaine is typically administered as a
2–3% solution. Although the pKa of 2-chloroprocaine is high, the onset
of action is fast because of the high concentration at which the drug is
administered. Due to this rapid onset, it may be used for emergent
cesarean sections in patients with an epidural catheter in place.

Benzocaine Benzocaine is a local anesthetic available in the form of a
topical spray. It is used as a topical local anesthetic for awake
ﬁberoptic intubation or endoscopy procedures. Similar to procaine,
benzocaine is metabolized to PABA and may lead to allergic reactions.
Additionally, benzocaine is associated with the development of
methemoglobinemia at high doses. Because of these risks, use of
benzocaine is limited.

Lidocaine Lidocaine is the most commonly used local anesthetic
worldwide. It has reliable nerve conduction blockade, a relatively fast
onset of action, intermediate duration, and minimal signiﬁcant side
eﬀects. Lidocaine may be administered in a variety of routes, with good
eﬀect, including subcutaneous injection, epidural injection, peripheral
nerve blockade, and topically. It is typically administered as a 1–4%
solution. Although lidocaine can be administered as a spinal injection,
its high association with transient neurologic syndrome limits this use.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics

113

Mepivacaine Mepivacaine can be used in a method very similar to
lidocaine. It has reliable nerve conduction blockade, a relatively fast
onset of action, and a slightly longer duration of action than
lidocaine. It may be administered as an epidural or spinal injection,
peripheral nerve blockade, or a subcutaneous injection. It is typically
administered as a 1–2% solution.

Bupivacaine Bupivacaine is a long-acting local anesthetic with a slow
onset of action. It can be administered in a variety of routes,
including spinal and epidural injection, peripheral nerve blockade, and
subcutaneous injection. Bupivacaine is typically administered as a
0.25–0.75% solution. It is also a local anesthetic that is the most
likely to contribute to cardiotoxicity. Local anesthetic cardiotoxicity
caused by bupivacaine is more likely to involve ventricular arrhythmias
compared to toxicity caused by lidocaine. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
is also less eﬀective in local anesthetic systemic toxicity caused by
bupivacaine than that caused by other local anesthetics. Bupivacaine’s
pronounced eﬀect on cardiac depression is thought to be caused by
stronger sodium channel blockade that leads to a greater decrease in
depolarization of Purkinje ﬁbers and ventricular muscle, as well as a
delayed recovery of sodium channels from local anesthetic blockade that
makes fewer of them available between action potentials.

Ropivacaine Ropivacaine is also a long-acting local anesthetic and was
developed to address the concern about bupivacaine-related
cardiotoxicity. In order to minimize cardiotoxicity, ropivacaine was
developed as a single enantiomer with fewer cardiotoxic eﬀects than
bupivacaine. It is typically used for epidural injection or peripheral
nerve blockade and is typically administered as 0.2–1% solutions. Animal
studies have demonstrated that ropivacaine leads to less profound
cardiovascular collapse and fewer severe arrhythmias, while providing
comparable therapeutic beneﬁt for regional anesthesia. Similarly,
levobupivacaine is also a single (S)-stereoisomer of bupivacaine; it is
also believed to be less cardiotoxic than bupivacaine.

EMLA Cream Eutectic Mixture of Local Anesthetics (EMLA) cream is a
topical local anesthetic consisting of lidocaine 2.5% and prilocaine
2.5%. It is commonly applied to intact skin and sometimes on genital
mucous membranes for dermal procedures. It can also be used for
intravenous catheter placement among pediatric patients. If applied
properly on intact skin and covered with an occlusive dressing, EMLA
cream should begin to take eﬀect within about

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

114

Chang H. Park and Garrett W. Burnett

45–60 minutes and reach peak eﬀect within about 2–3 hours. Although
adverse reactions associated with EMLA cream is not common, precautions
should be taken among speciﬁc patient populations. Since it contains
lidocaine and prilocaine, patients with an allergy to amide local
anesthetics should avoid using EMLA cream. Patients should exercise
caution when using EMLA cream while taking class I or III antiarrhythmic
drugs, out of concern that the cardiotoxic eﬀects could be potentially
additive or synergistic. In addition, patients with congenital
methemoglobinemia or glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁciency,
infants under a year old who are undergoing treatment with
methemoglobin-inducing agents, and other people at risk of
methemoglobinemia should use EMLA cream with caution out of concern
about an increased risk of inducing methemoglobinemia.

Complications Associated with Local Anesthetics Cauda Equina Syndrome
Cauda equina syndrome (CES), a condition in which the nerve roots of the
cauda equina are damaged, can be caused during anesthetic procedures
involving local anesthetics. These causes include maldistribution of
local anesthetics, intraneural injection of local anesthetics during
spinal anesthesia, needle trauma, infection, and patient positioning.
Lidocaine is classically associated with CES; however, case reports have
also demonstrated that bupivacaine also can cause CES. Symptoms of CES
include severe back pain, saddle anesthesia, bladder dysfunction, bowel
incontinence, sexual dysfunction, sensory loss and/or motor weakness of
the lower extremities, and loss of reﬂexes. Any combination of these
symptoms should prompt an urgent workup of CES. An immediate MRI should
be considered for diagnosis. A suspicion of CES warrants a neurologic
consult, as prompt surgical intervention oﬀers the best chance of
improvement of neurologic dysfunction and preventing further damage.

Transient Neurologic Symptoms Transient neurologic symptoms (TNS) is a
painful condition that can occur after undergoing spinal anesthesia.
Symptoms of TNS often present as pain and dysesthesia in the buttocks,
lower back, and lower extremities, typically within 12–24 hours after
spinal anesthesia. Although most of the local anesthetics can cause TNS,
lidocaine is considered the most common oﬀending agent. Unlike CES,
there are no neurologic deﬁcits. MRI and electrophysiologic studies are
normal in patients exhibiting TNS. Symptoms typically resolve within 2–3
days but rarely can last up to 10 days. Treatment during this duration
consists of supportive care with nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics

115

Methemoglobinemia Methemoglobinemia, a condition in which elevated
methemoglobin in the blood decreases oxygen delivery to tissues, can be
caused by local anesthetics. The two most commonly described local
anesthetics that cause methemoglobinemia are prilocaine and benzocaine.
Prilocaine is metabolized into orthotoluidine in the liver, which can
then oxidize hemoglobin into methemoglobin. Benzocaine directly oxidizes
hemoglobin into methemoglobin, but the underlying mechanism of this
process is not well understood. Signs and symptoms of methemoglobinemia
include headache, dizziness, shortness of breath, cyanosis, and mental
status changes. Methemoglobinemia can progressively lead to loss of
consciousness, seizures, coma, dysrhythmia, and death when methemoglobin
levels reach &gt;50% of total hemoglobin levels. Patients with
methemoglobinemia have an acceptable level of partial pressure of oxygen
despite a low oxygen saturation level; methemoglobinemia requires
cooximetry for an accurate diagnosis. Patients’ blood also exhibits a
classically characteristic chocolate brown appearance. The mainstays of
treatment of methemoglobinemia are oxygen and methylene blue. Methylene
blue reduces methemoglobin back to hemoglobin to allow oxygen delivery.

Allergic Reactions True allergic reactions to local anesthetics are rare
and represent a very small percentage of adverse reactions associated
with their use. Other reactions to local anesthetics that may present
similarly to allergic reactions include responses to epinephrine added
to local anesthetics, responses to preservatives, and systemic toxicity.
Ester local anesthetics form PABA as a metabolite, which is known to
trigger allergic reactions. Hence, allergic reactions to ester local
anesthetics are sometimes reactions to PABA. Methylparaben, which is
used in both amide and ester local anesthetic solutions, is also a known
allergen. A true allergic response to local anesthetics would manifest
with any of the following symptoms: rash, itching, hives, swelling, and
wheezing. Severe allergic reactions can result in bronchospasm,
laryngeal edema, hypotension, hypoxia, and tachycardia, and can lead to
anaphylactic shock. An allergic reaction to local anesthetics would
likely be treated based on clinical suspicion and history, but the
diagnosis can later be supported by measuring serum tryptase levels and
performing intradermal allergy testing. Treatment of allergic reactions
depends on the symptoms but may include administration of steroids,
bronchodilators, epinephrine, ﬂuids, and oxygen.

Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity Local anesthetics are very safe when
recommended dosages are used at the intended sites. However, when large
doses of local anesthetics reach the

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

116

Chang H. Park and Garrett W. Burnett

bloodstream, local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) may occur. LAST
aﬀects the central nervous system and cardiovascular system; symptoms
tend to become more severe in a dose-dependent fashion. Initial symptoms
for both the central nervous system and cardiovascular system tend to be
more excitatory in nature, but as the plasma concentrations of local
anesthetics increase, symptoms in both systems begin to exhibit signs of
depression. Symptoms of central nervous system toxicity include
dizziness, agitation, tinnitus, metallic taste, and slurred speech.
Severe symptoms include mental status changes, seizures, coma, and
respiratory arrest. The cardiovascular system tends to be more resistant
to toxicity. Cardiovascular toxicity can initially present with
hypertension and tachycardia but later progresses to hypotension and
bradycardia. Electrocardiographic changes manifest as prolongation of
the PR interval and widening of the QRS complex. More malignant
dysrhythmias can occur later, including complete heart block.
Eventually, complete cardiovascular collapse and death can ensue.
Although symptoms of LAST may present in any order, there is a common
pattern of symptom progression, as shown in Table 7.3. Given the
severity of the adverse eﬀects of LAST, it is important to try to
prevent it from occurring in the ﬁrst place. Since unintentional
intravascular injection can lead to LAST, it is important to conﬁrm that
no blood is aspirated prior to every local anesthetic injection. Small
incremental doses of Table 7.3 Common order of symptom onset in local
anesthetic systemic toxicity Order of symptoms in local anesthetic
systemic toxicity Late

Cardiovascular collapse Respiratory depression Coma Convulsions Altered
mental status

Early

Paresthesia Tinnitus Agitation Metallic taste in mouth

Although this order is commonly seen, symptoms may present in any order.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics

117

local anesthetic should be injected each time, while monitoring for
potential signs of toxicity. Exceeding the recommended maximum dose of
local anesthetics is another cause of systemic toxicity; thus, a
thorough knowledge of the maximum doses is vital. Once LAST is
suspected, practitioners must promptly begin aggressive supportive care
and advanced cardiovascular life support (ACLS). The airway should be
secured and the patient should be ventilated with 100% oxygen. Care must
be taken to avoid hypoxia, hypercapnia, and acidosis, all of which could
exacerbate the eﬀects of LAST. If the patient is experiencing seizures,
treatment should be initiated with benzodiazepines or barbiturates;
propofol should be avoided as an antiepileptic agent if the patient is
exhibiting cardiovascular instability. Lipid emulsion therapy is the
recommended treatment for LAST. The exact mechanism of action of lipid
emulsion is not known, but it is believed that it decreases the plasma
concentration of local anesthetics by increasing their clearance. Lipid
emulsion is also thought to reverse cardiac depression caused by local
anesthetics by reversing mitochondrial dysfunction. According to the
American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine’s (ASRA) LAST
checklist, a 1.5 mL kg−1 bolus of 20% lipid emulsion (or 100 mL for
patients weighing &gt;70 kg) should be administered over 2–3 minutes,
followed by repeat boluses as needed. An infusion of 0.25 mL/ (kg min)
should also be started, and doubled if the patient remains unstable.
Treatment with lipid emulsion should continue for 15 minutes, even after
the patient becomes stable, or for an approximate maximum dose of 12 mL
kg−1. ACLS in the setting of LAST diﬀers from standard resuscitation in
a few ways. It still involves chest compressions, deﬁbrillation, and use
of vasopressors. However, the dose of epinephrine should be reduced to
&lt;1 μg kg−1. Medications that can potentially worsen cardiac
depression, such as local anesthetics, beta-blockers, and calcium
channel blockers, should be avoided. Vasopressin is best avoided due to
evidence of adverse outcomes in animal models. Given the refractory
nature of cardiovascular collapse due to LAST, early consideration for
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is warranted, and thus the
nearest facility with cardiopulmonary bypass capability should be
notiﬁed if such capability is not immediately available.

Conclusion Local anesthetics provide excellent anesthesia and analgesia,
and are vital to the practice of modern anesthesiology. Knowledge of the
pharmacology of local anesthetics will guide anesthesiologists’ ability
to select an appropriate local anesthetic for every clinical scenario.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.008 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

8

Anesthesia Techniques: Mild, Moderate, and Deep Sedation in Clinical
Practice Mark R. Jones, Boris C. Anyama, Chikezie N. Okeagu, Meredith K.
Shaw, Madelyn K. Craig, and Alan David Kaye

Background Selection of the anesthetic technique to be employed during a
procedure begins during the preoperative evaluation with consideration
of factors such as the patient’s comorbidities and preferences and the
type of procedure to be performed. Oftentimes, general anesthesia is not
necessary and the procedure can be performed under a lesser depth of
sedation. Procedural sedation is a technique that allows the patient to
tolerate the discomfort of a procedure while still maintaining
cardiorespiratory function. In order to accomplish this, the anesthesia
provider administers sedative, dissociative, and/or analgesic agents
alone or in combination \[1\]. Although commonly regarded as one entity,
procedural sedation is a heterogeneous anesthetic technique that
encompasses a variety of levels of consciousness. The various depths of
sedation are diﬀerentiated by the physiologic changes induced by the
agents used and the patient’s response to stimuli. The American Society
of Anesthesiologists’s (ASA) continuum of sedation divides sedation into
three categories: minimal, moderate, and deep. Table 8.1 describes these
categories of anesthetic depth. Minimal sedation is a drug-induced state
deﬁned by preserved response to verbal stimulation. While cognitive
function and/or physical coordination may be impaired, a patient under
minimal sedation maintains the ability to protect their own airway and
ventilate spontaneously. Furthermore, cardiovascular function is
unaﬀected when under minimal sedation. Under moderate sedation, patients
retain the ability to respond purposefully to verbal or tactile stimuli.
Patients maintain the ability to protect their own airway and perform
adequate spontaneous ventilation without intervention from the
anesthesia provider. Cardiovascular function also is usually maintained.
This level of sedation is sometimes referred to colloquially as
“conscious sedation.” Deep sedation is the greatest depth of sedation
before a patient is considered to be under general anesthesia. A patient
under deep sedation is still able to respond purposefully to stimuli but
only demonstrates this 119

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

120

Mark R. Jones, Boris C. Anyama, Chikezie N. Okeagu, et al.

Table 8.1 Depth of anesthesia Minimal sedation

Moderate sedation

Deep sedation

General anesthesia

Responsiveness

Normal response to verbal stimulation

Purposeful response to verbal or tactile stimulation

Purposeful response to repeated or painful stimulation

No response, even to painful stimulation

Airway

Unaﬀected

No intervention required

Intervention could be required

Intervention typically required

Spontaneous ventilation

Unaﬀected

Adequate

May be inadequate

Frequently inadequate

Cardiovascular function

Unaﬀected

Usually maintained

Usually maintained

May be impaired

ability following repeated or painful stimulation. Importantly, reﬂex
withdrawal from painful stimuli is not considered purposeful. Patients
under deep sedation may exhibit impairment of spontaneous ventilation
and may require intervention to aid in protecting their airways. Just as
in the lesser depths of sedation, cardiovascular function is usually
maintained in patients under deep sedation. Since sedation is a
continuum, it is diﬃcult, and sometimes impossible, to predict how a
particular patient will respond to the administered medications. As
such, providers should always be prepared to “rescue” a patient from a
level of sedation that is deeper than anticipated. Of note, the term
monitored anesthesia care (MAC) is often used to describe situations in
which patients are under a depth of sedation that is less than general
anesthesia. It is important to note that MAC is not a particular depth
of sedation, but rather a billing designation that indicates the
involvement of an anesthesiologist \[2\]. Procedural sedation is
appropriate for a wide array of procedures and can be performed in a
variety of locations. In the hospital, procedural sedation is often
required in the emergency department to facilitate procedures such as
laceration repair and fracture reduction. Similarly, endoscopic
procedures, such as colonoscopy, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), and
transesophageal echocardiography, are often performed under sedation.
Sedation is also utilized in the operating room for patients undergoing
surgery. In these instances, it is often combined with other

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Mild, Moderate, and Deep Sedation in Clinical Practice

121

techniques such as regional or local anesthesia. Lastly, sedation can be
performed out of the hospital in oﬃce-based settings to aid in the
performance of procedures such dental or dermatologic procedures.
Regardless of location or procedure, it is important for the provider in
charge of administering sedation to possess the appropriate skill set
and monitoring and resuscitation equipment to do so safely.

Provider Roles A board-certiﬁed anesthesiologist is a physician who has
completed medical school, was enrolled in, and completed, a certiﬁed
anesthesiology residency program, and has passed all accreditation and
licensing examinations, whether written or oral. The ASA believes that
at least one physician anesthesiologist should be involved in the care
of each patient receiving anesthetics \[3\]. This physician
anesthesiologist may be directly providing care for the patient or often
supervising another practitioner \[4–6\]. These practitioners can
include a physician currently enrolled in training, either residency or
fellowship, or a nonphysician anesthesia care provider. A nonphysician
anesthesia care provider can include a certiﬁed registered nurse
anesthetist (CRNA), a registered nurse who has completed an accredited
program for nursing, has completed a set amount of time working in an
intensive care unit environment, and has completed training and the
accompanying licensing examinations as part of the nurse anesthetist
accreditation \[3–5\]. Additionally, nursing providers in both the
preoperative area and the postanesthesia care unit, as well as
intraoperatively, are important in providing assistance to the
anesthesia care team. They are often able to identify or anticipate
issues that may arise, be an advocate for the patient, and provide
additional assistance to the anesthesiologist if necessary \[7\]. Thus,
there are a multitude of individuals in various healthcare professions
and levels of training who make important contributions to the
perioperative care team of the patient.

Drug Selection This section will discuss the most commonly utilized
pharmacologic agents in sedation anesthesia practice. Table 8.2 provides
a summation of the below medications.

Benzodiazepines Benzodiazepines act on type A gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) receptors in the brainstem, causing anxiolytic, amnesic, and
sedative eﬀects, without an analgesic eﬀect \[1\]. Lorazepam, diazepam,
and midazolam are commonly used benzodiazepines in anesthesia. These
drugs have various ways of

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Intravenous, oral, intramuscular

Intravenous

Intravenous, oral, intramuscular

Intravenous, oral

Intravenous, oral, intramuscular

Inhaled

Benzodiazepine (midazolam)

Propofol

Opioids (fentanyl, remifentanil, alfentanil)

Dexmedetomidine

Ketamine

Nitrous oxide

−1

n/a

0.25–0.5 mg kg

−1

1 g kg−1 over 10 minutes

Fentanyl: 2–50 μg kg Remifentanil: 1 μg kg−1 Alfentanil: 8–100 μg kg−1

20–30 mg bolus

0.02–0.04 mg kg−1

Initial intravenous dosage

a Usually administered with propofol. +, weak eﬀect; ++, moderate eﬀect;
+++, strong eﬀect; −, no eﬀect.

Administration

Drug

a

n/a

2.5–15 μg/(kg min)

0.3–0.7 g/(kg hr)

+/− Intensiﬁes eﬀects of other sedative anesthetics

+++

++

Intensiﬁes eﬀects of other sedative anesthetics

+++

25–75 μg/(kg min) Bolus in 5-min intervals to obtain titrated eﬀect 0.1
μg/(kg min) 0.5–3 μg/(kg min)

+++

Sedative eﬀect

0.25–1.0 g/(kg min)

Infusion rate

Table 8.2 Commonly used anesthetic agents in sedation practice and their
pharmacologic properties

Mild, Moderate, and Deep Sedation in Clinical Practice

123

administration for sedation (e.g., intravenously, intramuscular, oral).
Lorazepam and diazepam are insoluble (formulated with propylene glycol)
and well absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, making oral
administration favorable \[2\]. Midazolam is water-soluble at low pH and
commonly used as an anesthesia premedication in adults intravenously or
intramuscularly (0.02– 0.04 mg kg−1) and orally in children (0.4–0.8 mg
kg−1) \[1\]. Minimal risk of cardiopulmonary depression exists when
using midazolam in small dosages for procedural sedations. Midazolam is
also preferred to maintain hypnosis and amnesia, with continuous
infusion rates of 0.25–1.0 g/(kg min), while given with an inhalational
agent or opioids. In addition, midazolam can enhance the eﬀects of other
opioids and sedatives when administered concomitantly \[3\]. Due to a
prolonged emergence, administration of midazolam as an infusion for
sedation should be reserved for short cases or patients who are expected
to remain intubated \[1\]. Benzodiazepines can be pharmacologically
reversed with ﬂumazenil (0.5–1 mg intravenously), a competitive
antagonist, making them favorable for sedation in the setting of a
threatened airway \[1\]. Benzodiazepines are usually avoided during
pregnancy because newborns can exhibit withdrawal symptoms from
benzodiazepine administration to the mothers.

Propofol Propofol is a rapid- and short-acting drug that acts on the
type A GABA channel to provide sedative, amnesia, and antiemetic
properties \[2, 4\]. Similar to benzodiazepines, propofol does not cause
analgesia. Propofol is commonly used for moderate procedural sedation by
intermittent boluses (20–30 mg) or titrated infusion (25–75 μg/(kg min))
intravenously \[1\]. Children will need a higher dose to overcome the
accelerated clearance and larger volume of distribution to achieve an
ideal sedative eﬀect. Propofol has a narrow therapeutic index and can
deepen the levels of sedation quickly. Consequently, close monitoring
for adverse eﬀects (e.g., myocardial depression) in patients receiving
propofol is imperative. Because there is no reversal agent for propofol,
oversedated patients should be managed with supportive therapy (e.g.,
airway support) until the agent is metabolized \[1, 2\]. Prolonged use
of a high-dose propofol infusion in a critically ill population may
cause propofol infusion syndrome (PRIS), which is characterized by
rhabdomyolysis, cardiac failure, renal failure, metabolic acidosis,
hepatomegaly, hyperkalemia, and hypertriglyceridemia \[1\]. If PRIS is
suspected, propofol must be discontinued immediately and an alternative
sedative should be used.

Opioids Opioids bind to speciﬁc receptors (μ, κ, δ, and σ) throughout
the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system to provide
analgesia and supplemental sedation \[1, 2\]. Fentanyl, remifentanil,
and alfentanil are

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

124

Mark R. Jones, Boris C. Anyama, Chikezie N. Okeagu, et al.

common opioids used in anesthesia for sedation. Opioids alone mainly
have analgesic properties, but when used with other agents (e.g.,
propofol and midazolam), they can intensify the eﬀect of sedation.
Fentanyl, short-acting, is administered intravenously in 2–50 μg kg−1
boluses at 5-minute intervals to obtain a titrated eﬀect \[2\].
Remifentanil, ultrashort-acting, is administered as a typical bolus dose
of 1 μg kg−1, followed by an infusion of 0.5–20 μg/(kg min). Alfentanil,
ultrashort-acting, is administered as a bolus dose of 8–100 μg kg−1,
followed by an infusion rate of 0.5–3 μg/(kg min). Keep in mind that
opioid dose should be halved when midazolam is used, to decrease the
risk of adverse eﬀects from opioids (e.g., ventilatory depression,
increased vagal tone, muscle rigidity) \[1, 2\]. Naloxone, an opioid
receptor antagonist, may be administered (0.5–1 μg kg−1) every 3–5
minutes until the clinical signs of opioids are reversed.

Dexmedetomidine Dexmedetomidine, a centrally acting and selective
α2-agonist, provides sedative, anxiolytic, and some analgesic eﬀects
without major respiratory depression \[1, 5\]. Administration can be
intravenously (most common), orally, nasally, intramuscularly, or
rectally. Dexmedetomidine given as an intravenous infusion is titrated
(0.3–0.7 g/(kg hr)), based on the level of sedation and the stability of
the patient’s hemodynamics. An initial loading dose (1 g kg−1 over 10
minutes) can be given but warrants consideration due to an increased
risk of hemodynamic instability. The onset of action is slower and
sedation tends to be prolonged compared to other sedatives, making
dexmedetomidine a less favorable sedation of choice for certain
procedures \[6\].

Ketamine Ketamine, a rapid-acting and short-duration
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, provides analgesia,
dissociative amnesia, and sedation, with minimal respiratory depression
\[1, 7\]. In clinical practice, ketamine is administered intravenously
and intramuscularly \[2\]. For sedation, ketamine is usually given in
combination with propofol (2.5–15 μg/(kg min) intravenously) or alone
with an initial bolus of 0.25– 0.5 mg kg−1 \[7\]. Ketamine sedation may
cause the patient’s eyes to stay open, but remaining unresponsive to
stimuli \[1, 7\]. Ketamine causes a release of catecholamines, resulting
in increased heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output. Patients
with catecholamine depletion can have myocardial depression \[1, 2, 7\].
Other adverse eﬀects, such as laryngospasm from increased oral
secretions and emergence reactions (vivid dreams and hallucinations),
can be reduced by taking pharmacological agents concomitantly (e.g.,
glycopyrrolate and benzodiazepines).

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Mild, Moderate, and Deep Sedation in Clinical Practice

125

Nitrous Oxide Nitrous oxide, a rapid-onset and -oﬀset inhalational
anesthetic agent, provides analgesic, anxiolytic, and sedative eﬀects,
with minimal hemodynamic eﬀects \[1, 2\]. Nitrous oxide is typically
used as a supplemental agent for maintenance of general anesthesia to
increase the depth of sedation, resulting in less dose requirements for
the inhalational or intravenous anesthetic agent being used. Nitrous
oxide when co-administered with other volatile inhalational agents can
increase the speed of the anesthetic onset and oﬀset, known as the
“second gas” eﬀect \[1, 2, 9\]. Prolonged use of nitrous oxide can cause
anemia (by irreversibly inhibiting methionine synthetase) \[1\]. Because
nitrous oxide is extremely soluble (35 times more soluble than
nitrogen), some conditions are contraindicated for the usage of the
inhalational agent (e.g., pneumothorax, air embolism, acute intestinal
obstruction with bowl distension) \[2\].

Preprocedure History and Physical An essential component of every
anesthesia practice is preoperative evaluation and risk assessment to
screen patients prior to the delivery of anesthesia and to intervene,
when necessary, to minimize perioperative morbidity and mortality. A key
component of the preoperative evaluation is the history and physical
examination. A patient’s medical comorbidities and its therapies,
surgical history, social history, physical examination, and functional
capacity are needed to assess a patient’s anesthetic risks, optimize
chronic medical conditions, and develop an anesthetic plan \[8, 9\]. All
patients undergoing anesthesia should be assessed for their risk of
cardiac and pulmonary complications, PONV, delirium, and bleeding or
clotting complications \[10\]. The physical examination should include
at least an assessment of the patient’s airway, heart, and lungs. Other
systems examination should be based on the patient’s comorbidities and
the planned surgery. Inadequate evaluation or optimization of chronic
medical conditions increases the risk of perioperative complications
\[9\].

ASA Physical Status The ASA physical status classiﬁcation system is an
assessment tool that allows clinicians to communicate an adult patient’s
medical comorbidities. When used in combination with other risk
assessments tools, it aids in predicting perioperative outcomes. A
healthy patient without chronic medical comorbidities who is having
surgery for an acute problem is classiﬁed as ASA I. ASA II classiﬁcation
is for patients with systemic disease(s) that are mild or well
controlled and do not cause functional limitations. Examples include
well-controlled hypertension or

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

126

Mark R. Jones, Boris C. Anyama, Chikezie N. Okeagu, et al.

diabetes, smoking, pregnancy, and obesity with a body mass index (BMI)
&lt;40. Patients with systemic disease that is severe or uncontrolled
and limits functionality are assigned ASA III status. Poorly controlled
hypertension or diabetes, BMI &gt;40, end-stage renal disease with
scheduled dialysis, systolic heart failure with moderately reduced
ejection fraction, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and
cerebrovascular accident are all examples of systemic disease listed
under ASA III classiﬁcation. If the systemic disease is a constant
threat to the patient’s life, then the patient is considered ASA IV. A
patient not expected to survive without the operation is ASA V. ASA VI
is reserved for patients who have been declared brain-dead and are
having organ procurement surgery. An “E” is added for emergency
surgeries of which a delay could result in an increased threat to the
patient’s life or limb \[11\].

Fasting Guidelines The ASA published practice guidelines to aid in
determining the timing of preoperative fasting for elective procedures.
Categories include clear liquids, breast milk, infant formula, nonhuman
milk, and solids. Every patient should remain nil per os (NPO) for at
least 2 hours, and even longer, depending on the type of liquid or solid
ingested. If only clear liquids were consumed, procedures requiring any
type of sedation may be performed after 2 hours of fasting. Neonates and
infants may ingest breast milk up to 4 hours prior to anesthesia.
However, infant formula requires an additional 2 hours of fasting for a
total of 6 hours NPO. A fasting period of at least 6 hours is
recommended for a light meal or nonhuman milk. If fatty/fried foods or
meats were ingested, a fasting time of 8 or more hours is appropriate.
It is also important to consider the amount of food consumed and adjust
the fasting time accordingly \[12\].

Preoperative Testing and Consultation Routine preoperative testing, such
as blood tests, CXR, and ECG, has low clinical utility and is generally
not recommended. The majority of patients undergoing elective surgery
require minimal, if any, testing \[10\]. A routine ECG is indicated for
patients having high-risk surgery or patients with cardiovascular or
respiratory disease who are not having low-risk surgery. Patients with a
BMI &gt;40 who have an additional risk factor for cardiovascular disease
may also warrant a preoperative ECG. The 2014 American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines on perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation for noncardiac surgery contain a simple
algorithm to determine which patients should undergo a preoperative
stress test. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is recommended for
patients with known valvular disease or heart failure who have new or
worsening symptoms or who have not had TTE within a year. A new murmur
found on physical examination is another indication for preoperative
TTE. A routine CXR may

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Mild, Moderate, and Deep Sedation in Clinical Practice

127

be warranted for patients with known cardiovascular or pulmonary
disease, including smokers, those aged &gt;50 who have upper abdominal
or thoracic surgery, those with a BMI &gt;40, or patients who have had a
recent upper respiratory infection (URI). Pulmonary function tests
(PFTs) may be indicated for patients with symptomatic asthma or COPD,
depending on the type of surgery being performed. Screening for
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is recommended for most patients by using
the STOP-Bang tool. Preoperative hemoglobin and hematocrit may be
indicated in elderly patients and patients with a history of anemia or
hematologic disorder, or for surgeries with severe blood loss. Patients
with hematologic or hepatic disease should have a preoperative platelet
count assessed. Patients taking warfarin should have prothrombin time
measured. Other coagulation tests may be indicated for patients with
bleeding disorders or kidney or liver disease, or those undergoing
certain procedures. Serum chemistry may be indicated for elderly
patients, patients with kidney disease, patients taking certain
medications, or those requiring cardiac risk stratiﬁcation. It is
recommended that all females of childbearing age have a preoperative
pregnancy test. As long as there are no signiﬁcant changes in a
patient’s medical conditions, tests obtained within 6 months of an
elective procedure are deemed acceptable. Testing should be guided by
the presence of disease state or risk factors that will impact
anesthetic management. Unnecessary preoperative tests may lead to harm,
including increased costs and patient distress, especially when further
testing is unlikely to change perioperative management \[9, 10\].

Monitoring and Equipment The ASA has determined a standard of care for
the administration of anesthetics that includes monitoring of
ventilation, oxygenation, circulation, and body temperature of any
patient under the care of an anesthesiologist \[13\]. These monitors
provide information that assists the anesthesiologist in determining the
amount of anesthetic medication to provide analgesia and amnesia, while
simultaneously attempting to maintain the patient’s normal cardiac and
pulmonary homeostasis. Monitoring ventilation is done through end-tidal
carbon dioxide (ETCO2) detection and continuous quantiﬁcation, as well
as through capnographic waveform monitoring. These allow the
anesthesiologist to ensure the patient is maintaining adequate minute
ventilation in order to provide their tissues, often in a hypermetabolic
state, with oxygen \[13–15\]. Additionally, oxygenation of the patient
is supervised through oxygen analyzers on the anesthesia machine, which
are programmed to prevent delivery of a hypoxic mixture of gases, and a
pulse oximeter, which is placed directly on the patient. These ensure
that the anesthesiologist is providing an adequate amount of oxygen to
the patient and that oxygen is being delivered to the patient’s arterial
system

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

128

Mark R. Jones, Boris C. Anyama, Chikezie N. Okeagu, et al.

\[13, 15, 16\]. Providing sedation without continuous quantitative ETCO2
is below local, regional, and national standards of care, and can be a
critical reason for morbidity and mortality in the delivery of sedation.
In this regard, tubing that is connected to nasal cannulae or, when not
available, a cut plastic intravenous cannula can be taped under the nose
directly into the ETCO2 tubing and can be employed to ensure real-time
ventilation information for the clinical anesthesia provider. Prone
patients are at even greater risk when being provided with moderate or
deep sedation and these procedures are common in interventional pain
sites, gastrointestinal procedure suites, and other procedure areas. The
patient’s circulation is observed through ECG and either noninvasive or
invasive blood pressure monitoring \[13, 15, 16\]. ECG monitoring, which
should be at a minimum three-lead, allows the anesthesiologist to watch
for abnormalities in response to the demands placed on the patient’s
body by the anesthetic medications and the surgeon’s manipulation. Blood
pressure monitoring, which should be recorded at a minimum of every 3– 5
minutes, ensures that the patient maintains adequate perfusion of their
vital organs \[13–15\]. Finally, the patient’s temperature should be
monitored as redistribution from anesthetic medications can cause core
heat loss. Additionally, it is a way by which, in addition to the other
monitors listed previously, the anesthesiologist providing care to the
patient can evaluate the patient for adverse reactions to medications
given \[13, 14, 17\]. The most discussed is malignant hyperthermia,
which presents with an acute increase in ETCO2, muscle rigidity, and
elevated temperature, in addition to severe metabolic abnormalities.
Thus, all the monitors required by the ASA allow the anesthesiologist to
provide the highest quality of care to the patient, by allowing accurate
administration of anesthetic medications to the patient, and to avert
adverse consequences in response to those anesthetic administrations.

Conclusion Various techniques and practices are available to the
anesthetic provider when considering the utilization of sedation during
interventions or surgeries. This chapter discussed the recognized
categories of sedation depth, necessary patient and provider
considerations prior to implementing sedation, pharmacologic agents
available to achieve the desired depth, and requirements for safe
maintenance of monitoring of the patient under sedation. As always, the
utmost importance is placed on patient safety, and providers may refer
to this chapter as a guide for appropriate conduction of sedation when
practicing modern anesthesia, regardless of the clinical setting.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.009 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

9

Anesthesia Techniques: General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical
Practice Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, Chikezie N.
Okeagu, Meredith K. Shaw, Madelyn K. Craig, and Alan David Kaye

Background Preoperatively, the patient will transition from diﬀerent
depths of anesthesia, including the levels of sedation, to general
anesthesia (GA). Sedation is a continuum of symptoms that range from
minimal symptoms of anxiolysis to symptoms of moderate and deep
sedation. Moderate sedation is deﬁned by the patient remaining asleep
but being easily arousable. Deep sedation is achieved when the patient
is only arousable to painful stimulation. GA refers to medically induced
loss of consciousness with concurrent loss of protective reﬂexes and
skeletal muscle relaxation. GA is most commonly achieved via induction
with intravenous sedatives and analgesics, followed by maintenance of
volatile anesthetics \[1\]. Table 9.1 lists the depths of anesthesia and
associated characteristics. The stages of anesthesia can be based on
Guedel’s classiﬁcation, which includes four stages: • Stage I –
analgesia or disorientation: The patient is not yet unconscious and may
have just begun to feel the eﬀects of anesthesia. Patients typically
will remain conversational, and breathing will often be slow and
regular. • Stage II – excitement or delirium: There are many possible
patient reactions while beginning this phase. Disinhibition, delirium,
uncontrolled movements, hypertension, and tachycardia are commonly
associated. The airway will remain intact and will have a higher
sensitivity to stimulation. Airway manipulation must be avoided during
this phase. • Stage III – surgical anesthesia: Surgical anesthesia is
achieved once the patient has reached the appropriate anesthetic level
for procedures requiring GA. At this phase, it is safe to manipulate the
airway. The patient will begin to show signs of respiratory depression,
and eye movements will no longer be present. • Stage IV – overdose: If
the patient has received too much of an anesthetic agent, the patient is
at higher risk of worsening brain function. The stage will begin with
respiratory cessation and ends with potential death. The 131

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

No intervention required Adequate Usually maintained

Unaﬀected

Unaﬀected

Unaﬀected

Airway

Spontaneous ventilation

Cardiovascular function

Purposeful response to verbal or tactile stimulation

Normal response to verbal stimulation

Moderate sedation/ analgesia (“conscious sedation”)

Responsiveness

Minimal sedation/anxiolysis

Usually maintained

May be inadequate

Intervention may be required

Purposeful response following repeated or painful stimulation

Deep sedation/analgesia

Table 9.1 Deﬁnitions of diﬀerent anesthetic depths and associated
characteristics

May be impaired

Frequently inadequate

Intervention often required

Unarousable even with painful stimulus

General anesthesia

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

133

patient can become hypotensive, with decreased cardiac output and
peripheral vasodilation. The patient can also present with weak and
thready pulses \[2\].

Preoperative Evaluation The preoperative evaluation of the patient
before surgery requires a detailed history and physical examination,
ordering necessary laboratory workup, identifying the ASA physical
status classiﬁcation, and taking appropriate fasting precautions. The
ASA physical status categorizes patients by their preanesthesia medical
comorbidities. Classiﬁcation is a clinical decision based on multiple
factors, with the ﬁnal assessment made on the day of anesthesia care.
Table 9.2 describes the parameters of each ASA class. The preanesthesia
history will include all the components of the patient’s current and
past medical history, surgical history, family history, social history,
allergies, current and recent medication regimen, and history of prior
anesthetics. It is important to screen for any recent infections,
speciﬁcally upper and lower respiratory tract infections. Screening for
a family history of adverse reactions to anesthetics will help avoid
adverse reactions due to hereditary metabolic syndromes. Prenatal and
birth history should also be obtained in pediatric cases. A speciﬁc
assessment of prematurity at birth, perinatal complications, and
congenital chromosomal or anatomic abnormalities is also useful. While
obtaining the medication history, it is important to monitor for recent
use of medications that may interfere with anesthetic agents. For
example, monoamine oxidase inhibitors should be discontinued 2–3 weeks
before surgery. Oral contraceptive therapies should also be discontinued
at least 6 weeks before elective surgery due to the increased risk of
venothromboembolism. Herbal supplements have been considered by the ASA
and are recommended to be stopped 2 weeks before surgery. The
preanesthesia physical examination should focus on airway assessment,
examination of the heart and lungs, and documentation of the patient’s
vital signs. It is important to identify comorbid diseases during
history taking and physical examination that would necessitate further
workup and consultations. The anesthesia provider should pay special
attention to pulmonary, cardiac, renal, central nervous system (CNS),
and bleeding disorders, and follow through with appropriate laboratory,
study, or imaging \[3\]. Table 9.3 describes the indications for speciﬁc
preoperative tests. Before surgery, recommendations for fasting status
of various foods and liquids are provided for GA, regional anesthesia,
and procedural sedation and analgesia. The patient may ingest clear
liquids for up to 2 hours, breast milk for up to 4 hours, infant formula
for up to 6 hours, and solids and nonhuman milk for up to 6 hours. An
additional fasting time of up to 8 hours or more is recommended in
patients consuming fried foods, fatty foods, or

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

A normal healthy patient

A patient with mild systemic disease

A patient with severe systemic disease

A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life

A moribund patient who is not expected to survive without the operation

A declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for donor
purposes

ASA I

ASA II

ASA III

ASA IV

ASA V

ASA VI

Examples included ruptured abdominal/thoracic aneurysm, massive trauma,
intracranial bleed with mass eﬀect, ischemic bowel with threat to
cardiac pathology or multiple organ/system dysfunction

Examples include recent MI, CVA, TIA, or CAD/PCI (&lt;3 months), ongoing
cardiac ischemia or severe valve dysfunction, severely reduced EF,
sepsis, DIC, ARF or ESRD not regularly undergoing dialysis

Functional limitations with one or more moderate to severe diseases.
Examples include poorly controlled DM or HTN, COPD, morbid obesity (BMI
≥40), active hepatitis, moderately reduced EF, ESRD regularly undergoing
dialysis, premature infant, history of MI, CVA, TIA, or CAD/PCI

Mild diseases without functional limitations, including current smoker,
social alcohol drinker, pregnancy, obesity (30 &lt; BMI &lt; 40),
wellcontrolled DM/HTN, mild lung disease

Healthy, nonsmoker, no or minimal alcohol use

Adult examples (including, but not limited to)

BMI, body mass index; DM, diabetes mellitus; HTN, hypertension; COPD,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; EF, ejection fraction; ESRD,
end-stage renal disease; MI, myocardial infarction; CVA, cerebrovascular
accident; TIA, transient ischemic attack; CAD, coronary artery disease;
PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; CVA, cerebrovascular accident;
DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy; ARF, acute renal failure.

Deﬁnition

ASA physical status classiﬁcation

Table 9.2 Characteristics of American Society of Anesthesiologists’
physical classiﬁcation

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

135

Table 9.3 Indications for speciﬁc preoperative tests Complete blood
count

• Major surgery • Chronic cardiovascular, pulmonary, renal, or hepatic
disease, or malignancy • Known or suspected anemia, bleeding diathesis,
or myelosuppression International normalized ratio (INR), activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)

• Anticoagulant therapy • Bleeding diathesis • Liver disease
Electrolytes and creatinine

• • • • •

Hypertension Renal disease Diabetes Pituitary or adrenal disease Digoxin
or diuretic therapy, or other drug therapies aﬀecting electrolytes

Fasting glucose

• Diabetes (should be repeated on day of surgery) Electrocardiography

• Heart disease, hypertension, diabetes • Other risk factors for cardiac
disease (may include age) • Subarachnoid or intracranial hemorrhage,
cerebrovascular accident, or head trauma Chest radiograph

• Cardiac or pulmonary disease • Malignancy

meat \[4\]. Table 9.4 describes the fasting and pharmacologic
recommendations for induction of anesthesia.

Induction of Anesthesia Inhalational Induction Inhalation anesthesia
began with the introduction of diethyl ether in 1846. Modern halothane
was produced in 1956, leading to a new method of rapid and safe
inhalational induction. Inhalational induction with halothane had been
primarily utilized in pediatric populations and patients with diﬃcult
airways. Sevoﬂurane was later introduced in the 1990s and gained
popularity

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

136

Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, et al.

Table 9.4 Fasting and pharmacologic recommendations Fasting
recommendations Ingested material

Minimum fasting period (hours)

Clear liquids

2

Breast milk

4

Infant formula

6

Nonhuman milk

6

Light meal

6

Fried foods, fatty foods, or meat

8 or more

Pharmacologic recommendations Medication type and common examples

Recommendation

Gastrointestinal stimulants:

May be used/no routine use

• Metoclopramide Gastric acid secretion blockers:

• • • • •

May be used/no routine use

Cimetidine Famotidine Ranitidine Omeprazole Lansoprazole

Antacids:

May be used/no routine use

• Sodium citrate • Sodium bicarbonate • Magnesium trisilicate
Antiemetics:

May be used/no routine use

• Ondansetron Anticholinergics:

No use

• Atropine • Scopolamine • Glycopyrrolate

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

137

due to minimal airway irritation. Inhalational induction has been shown
to have a perceived advantage over propofol through its avoidance of
suppression of airway reﬂexes. Sevoﬂurane can also provide relatively
stable cardiac and hemodynamic conditions in patients at risk of
hypotension, hypertension, and tachycardia. Studies have also shown
similar outcomes when measuring cardiovascular stability during tracheal
intubation in hypertensive patients compared to propofol. There are also
documented case studies utilizing rapid sequence induction with
sevoﬂurane in cesarean section without any reported adverse advents. Due
to changes in the respiratory physiology in pregnant patients, induction
is accelerated. It will have a decreased minimum alveolar concentration
(MAC) due to increased ventilation with a reduced functional reserve
capacity \[1\].

Intravenous Induction Inhalational induction was initially the only
practiced technique before the introduction of thiopental in 1934.
Intravenous induction became a popular method, allowing the care
provider more options to utilize safe induction agents. Compared to
inhalation anesthesia, speciﬁc intravenous anesthetic medications
decreased overall side eﬀects. Intravenous induction agents include
barbiturates, phenols, imidazoles, phencyclidines, and benzodiazepines
\[1\]. Thiopental is a barbiturate, producing a smooth onset of hypnosis
and rapid recovery. There have been reportedly low incidences of
restlessness, nausea, and vomiting. The liver slowly metabolizes
thiopental via ﬁrst-order kinetics. Elimination will remain constant
with increases in doses. It also acts as a negative inotrope depressing
contractility of the heart. This will have a subsequent reduction in
cardiac output and blood pressure. It is also common to have respiratory
depression and can be seen following a bolus dose. Propofol is a
short-acting general anesthetic medication and the onset of action is
approximately 30 seconds. Induction will typically be smooth, and
patients generally experience a rapid recovery from anesthesia due to
its short half-life of 2–4 minutes. Induction with propofol can be
associated with drops in blood pressure, secondary to systemic
vasodilation, and can have associated reﬂex tachycardia. Etomidate is an
imidazole ester and is associated with the least amount of
cardiovascular side eﬀects of intravenous anesthetics. It can, however,
have cardiovascular eﬀects and can cause a mild reduction in cardiac
output and blood pressure. It is rapidly metabolized by the liver,
yielding inactive metabolites, and is eliminated via the urine, with a
half-life of 1–5 hours. Standard recovery is rapid due to redistribution
to muscle and fat. Etomidate was used

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

138

Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, et al.

in shocked, elderly, and cardiovascular-compromised patients but has
recently become less commonly used. Ketamine is a derivative of
phencyclidine, which was a formerly used anesthetic agent. It is
metabolized in the liver and excreted in the urine. Common associations
on induction include tachycardia, hypertension, and increased cardiac
output. Due to these eﬀects, it is also chosen as induction agent in
shocked and unwell patients. Airway reﬂexes remain intact and it
produces minimal eﬀects on the respiratory drive. Benzodiazepines,
including midazolam and diazepam, are the most commonly used agents for
anxiolysis, and α2 inhibitors and melatonin are also used, albeit much
less often. Controlling anxiety has demonstrated decreased complications
in perioperative care. More speciﬁcally, it has decreased hemodynamic
instability, decreased anesthetic consumption during anesthesia, and
improved postoperative pain, recovery time, and hospital stay \[5\].

Airway Management Mask Ventilation Mask ventilation is fundamental to
the practice of anesthesia. This basic skill is one of the most
important tools in airway management. It is performed before
endotracheal intubation and used as a rescue maneuver if intubation is
diﬃcult or fails. Obtaining a tight seal with the face mask is an
important aspect of successful mask ventilation. The face mask should ﬁt
over the bridge of the nose and enclose the mouth, with the bottom
positioned between the lower lip and the chin. Leaks may develop if the
mask is not the correct size, the cushion is improperly inﬂated, or the
patient has a beard or an abnormal anatomy. Risk factors for diﬃcult
mask ventilation include a beard, increased BMI, edentulousness, limited
mandibular protrusion, Mallampati III or IV, history of snoring or
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), airway masses or tumors, history of neck
radiation, male gender, and age &gt;55. The triple maneuver (jaw thrust,
head extension, and chin lift) should be used to maximize pharyngeal
patency. Once the triple maneuver is performed, the left hand holds this
position, with the mask sealed tightly to the face, while the right hand
squeezes the reservoir bag. If maintaining the triple maneuver position
or an adequate seal with one hand proves diﬃcult, the two-handed mask
ventilation technique should be utilized and a second provider assists
ventilation with the bag. An oral or nasal airway may be required to
overcome obstruction, resulting from the tongue falling back to the
posterior pharyngeal wall. It is important to note that using an oral
airway may elicit a gag reﬂex or cause laryngospasm if the depth of
anesthesia is inadequate. A nasal airway is better tolerated in these
situations. Ventilating pressure should not exceed 20 cmH2O to avoid
gastric

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

139

distension, regurgitation, and aspiration. If mask ventilation proves
diﬃcult or impossible, alternative strategies to ventilate the patient
must be attempted such as intubation or placement of a supraglottic
airway (SGA) \[1, 5\].

Supraglottic Airways SGA devices are an alternative method to mask
ventilation and endotracheal intubation. They have made their way into
the diﬃcult airway algorithm with their ease of use and rescue
ventilation ability. Quick placement, less sympathetic stimulation,
avoidance of neuromuscular blockers, and maintenance of spontaneous
ventilation are a few advantages of SGAs over endotracheal tubes (ETTs).
SGAs may be used as primary airway devices for selected patients and
surgeries, in emergencies in and out of the hospital, to facilitate
endotracheal intubation, and most importantly for airway rescue in the
unable-to-ventilateor-intubate situation. Nonfasting status, morbid
obesity, and pregnancy are contraindications for laryngeal mask airway
(LMA) use as the primary airway. OSA, gastro-esophageal reﬂux disease
(GERD), gastroparesis, and position other than supine are factors that
increase the risk of complications when using SGAs \[2\]. The LMA
Classic, one of the ﬁrst SGAs, is a reusable device made of silicone. A
disposable, single-use version of the LMA Classic is the LMA Unique.
Designed for intraoral procedures, the LMA Flexible has a wirereinforced
shaft to allow ﬂexible positioning away from the surgical site. The LMA
Fastrach, an intubating LMA, has a rigid, curved shaft and handle that
facilitate placement of an ETT through its ventilating tube with or
without the assistance of a ﬁberoptic scope. The reusable LMA ProSeal
was the ﬁrst LMA designed with a drainage tube to reduce the risk of
aspiration. This drainage tube also facilitates placement of an
orogastric tube. The LMA ProSeal’s design creates an improved airway
seal without adding pressure to the oropharyngeal tissue. A disposable
alternative to the LMA ProSeal is the LMA Supreme. In addition to the
gastric drainage tube like the LMA ProSeal, the LMA Supreme has a curved
shaft like the LMA Fastrach. The LMA Classic Excel is an intubating
version of the LMA Classic. The AirQ (disposable) and Intubating
Laryngeal Airway (reusable) were designed with unique features to assist
endotracheal intubation but may also be used as a primary airway. The
Cobra Perilaryngeal Airway (PLA) diﬀers from the previously discussed
SGAs with its high-volume, low-pressure pharyngeal cuﬀ that sits just
proximal to the cuﬄess mask. It also allows passage of an ETT. The
EsophagealTracheal Combitube and the King Laryngeal Tube were designed
to achieve ventilation after blind insertion, making them useful for
prehospital use or by unskilled operators. Their double cuﬀ design
allows ventilation via the larynx by inﬂating the esophagus’s distal cuﬀ
and the hypopharynx’s proximal cuﬀ. The uniquely designed I-GEL device
uses a cuﬄess mask made of a gel

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

140

Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, et al.

material that conforms to the larynx. It has a gastric drainage tube
that allows passage of an orogastric tube \[3\].

Endotracheal Intubation Endotracheal intubation is achieved with an ETT
via an orotracheal or nasotracheal approach. There are several types of
ETTs used to achieve endotracheal intubation. The standard cuﬀed ETT is
single lumen and comes in various sizes, based on the internal diameter
of the tube. Specialty singlelumen tubes include oral and nasal
Ring–Adair–Elwyn (RAE) tubes, wirereinforced tubes, laser-resistant
tubes, and electromyogram (EMG) tubes. Oral and nasal RAE tubes have a
preformed bend to allow positioning of the tube and circuit away from
the surgical ﬁeld for facial, oral, or dental surgeries, or
neurosurgery. Wire-reinforced tubes contain a metal wire spiraled along
their length to minimize kinking or allow positioning away from the
surgical ﬁeld. Laser-resistant tubes are used during laser surgery of
the upper airway to decrease the risk of airway ﬁre. EMG monitoring
tubes, such as the neural integrity monitor (NIM) tube, allow monitoring
of the recurrent laryngeal nerve during thyroid and other neck surgeries
\[4, 6\]. Several techniques are available for endotracheal intubation.
Orotracheal intubation is most commonly performed via direct
laryngoscopy using a Macintosh (curved) or Miller (straight) blade to
visualize the glottic opening and insert the ETT. Indirect visualization
using a video laryngoscope may be chosen for patients with suspected
diﬃcult airway or immobilization of the cervical spine. Video
laryngoscopes are categorized as either channeled or nonchanneled.
Nonchanneled videoscopes include the more commonly used Glidescope,
C-MAC, and McGrath. While these devices provide improved glottic
visualization, there can still be diﬃculty directing the ETT into the
glottis. Channeled videoscopes have a guide channel into which the ETT
is preloaded and directs the tube towards the glottic opening. Airtraq
and King Vision Video Laryngoscope are types of channeled devices. A
disadvantage of these devices is that the thicker blades require a
greater interincisor distance. Fiberoptic intubation is another option
for management of a known or suspected diﬃcult airway. It allows
intubation in an awake patient; however, this technique requires airway
anesthesia. Nasotracheal intubation is typically chosen for intraoral
and mandibular surgeries. It can be performed blindly, with the
assistance of direct or video laryngoscopy or a ﬁberoptic scope \[7,
8\]. Table 9.5 describes the currently available techniques for
endotracheal intubation.

Maintenance of Anesthesia After induction of GA and management of the
airway, it is necessary to maintain the patient at an appropriate depth
of anesthesia to allow for the surgery’s completion. This is almost
exclusively achieved with

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

141

Table 9.5 Intubation techniques Technique

Indications

Contraindications

Equipment

Oral route

Airway protection Prolonged mechanical ventilation General anesthesia
for surgery

Penetrating trauma of upper airway

Laryngoscope/ ﬁberoptic Stylet Bougie/ Eschmann Airway exchange catheter
Intubation introducer/catheter

Nasal route

Intraoral surgery Mandibular surgery Poor mouth opening

Basilar skull fracture Nasal fractures Epistaxis Nasal polyps
Coagulopathy

Laryngoscope/ ﬁberoptic McGills Red rubber

Direct laryngoscopy

Airway protection Prolonged mechanical ventilation General anesthesia
for surgery

Poor mouth opening Documented diﬃcult airway Airway mass/tumor

Light handle Blade

Video laryngoscopy

History of diﬃcult intubation Suspected diﬃcult intubation Inability to
extend the neck Cervical instability

Severe bleeding of upper airway

Videoscope handle and screen

Flexible ﬁberoptic intubation

History of diﬃcult intubation Suspected diﬃcult intubation Compromised
airway Inability to extend the neck Cervical instability Trauma to upper
airway

High-grade stenosis of airway Severe bleeding of upper airway Pharyngeal
abscess

Fiberoptic scope

See references \[7\] and \[9\].

intravenous or inhalational agents, although it is theoretically
possible to accomplish maintenance of anesthesia with repeated
intramuscular injections of an agent such as ketamine. Selection of the
most appropriate

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

142

Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, et al.

method requires considering the patient history, surgical requirements,
availability of equipment, and patient preferences \[10\]. While it is
possible to maintain anesthesia through the sole use of a single
modality (i.e., intravenous or inhalational), maintenance of anesthesia
is more commonly carried out by utilizing a balanced approach that
involves the administration of multiple agents of diﬀerent classes. This
allows less of each agent to be used, thereby increasing the likelihood
of observing the intended eﬀect without undesired side eﬀects \[11\]. A
thorough understanding of the approaches to maintenance of anesthesia is
essential to making informed decisions regarding which is most
appropriate for an individual patient.

Inhalational Anesthetics Upwards of 90% of general anesthetics utilize
inhalational agents in the maintenance phase \[10\]. Their use began in
the 1800s when it was discovered that agents such as nitrous oxide,
diethyl ether, and chloroform could be used to produce analgesia and
hypnosis during painful procedures. These discoveries developed other
inhalational anesthetics such as halothane, enﬂurane, methoxyﬂurane,
isoﬂurane, desﬂurane, and sevoﬂurane. Due to largely unfavorable
properties (i.e., high ﬂammability of ether) and side eﬀects (i.e., high
rates of hepatotoxicity seen with chloroform and halothane use,
nephrotoxicity with methoxyﬂurane use, and seizure activity with
enﬂurane), many of these agents fell out of favor. In addition to the
gaseous nitrous oxide, the volatile anesthetics isoﬂurane, sevoﬂurane,
and desﬂurane are commonly used in modern anesthesia \[12\]. Table 9.6
describes inhalational anesthetic agents and their properties. Despite
decades of use in the maintenance of anesthesia, the mechanisms by which
inhalational anesthetics produce their eﬀects are still unclear and
there is no consensus regarding what constitutes the anesthetized state.
Immobility is easier to assess than other parameters such as analgesia
or awareness and, as such, is often used as a surrogate to measure the
depth of GA. The MAC measures the anesthetic required to suppress
movement in response to a surgical incision in 50% of patients. At 1.2
MAC, 95% of patients should not move in response to a surgical incision,
and 99% of patients should not move in response to an incision at 1.3
MAC of an inhaled anesthetic. Approximately 0.7 MAC is the concentration
required to prevent awareness and recall. The MAC is inversely
proportional to the potency – the higher the MAC of an agent, the less
potent it is. Of the commonly used inhalational agents, isoﬂurane is the
most potent with a MAC of 1.2, followed by sevoﬂurane with a MAC of 1.8
and desﬂurane with a MAC of 6.6. The MAC of nitrous oxide is 103
(&gt;100%); therefore, it cannot be used by itself to achieve GA. The
residual eﬀects of induction

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

143

Table 9.6 Inhalational anesthetic agents and their properties Minimum
alveolar concentration (MAC)

Blood/gas partition coeﬃcient

Oil/gas partition coeﬃcient

Chloroform

0.77

8

400

Desﬂurane

6.6

0.42

18.7

Diethyl ether

1.92

12

65

Enﬂurane

1.68

1.9

98

Halothane

0.75

2.4

220

Isoﬂurane

1.2

1.4

97

Methoxyﬂurane

0.2

11.0

950

Nitrous oxide

103

0.47

1.4

Sevoﬂurane

1.8

0.6

53

agents decrease the MAC, resulting in lower concentrations of gas
necessary to achieve the desired level of anesthesia. Several other
factors also aﬀect the MAC. Factors such as hyperthermia, young age,
hyperthyroidism, chronic alcohol use, anxiety, and stimulant use
increase the MAC. In contrast, increased age, hypothyroidism,
hypothermia, acute alcohol use, pregnancy, hypercarbia, and drugs such
as opioids, benzodiazepines, and α2-adrenergic agonists decrease the MAC
\[10, 12, 13\]. The MAC of an inhalational anesthetic relates to its
potency, which, in turn, correlates with its solubility in oil \[12,
13\]. This is important as it highlights the importance of interactions
with predominantly hydrophobic targets within the body (CNS) \[13\]. The
more lipophilic an agent, the more easily it will cross the blood–brain
barrier to exert its eﬀect. This is measured by the oil:gas coeﬃcient of
the agent. Conversely, the blood:gas coeﬃcient measures the solubility
of an agent in blood and reﬂects how fast the agent is taken up into the
blood from the alveoli. Agents with high oil:gas coeﬃcients have low
blood:gas coeﬃcients and will have a relatively slow uptake, but they
are highly potent.

Total Intravenous Anesthesia It is possible to conduct GA through the
exclusive use of intravenous agents, referred to as total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA). The choice of TIVA over inhalational agents is based
on individual patient factors. TIVA

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

144

Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, et al.

has several advantages, including reduced postoperative nausea and
vomiting (PONV), lower rates of postoperative delirium (especially in
the elderly), the ability to rapidly titrate medications, independence
from ventilation, reduced atmospheric pollution, and ease of
inter-/intrahospital transfer. Importantly, TIVA eliminates the risk of
triggering malignant hyperthermia (MH) and is therefore compulsory in
patients with a history of, or strong risk factors for, MH.
Disadvantages include increased costs, compared to inhalational
anesthesia, and diﬃculty in evaluating the drug eﬀects. Unlike
inhalational agents, with end-tidal concentration measured to assess the
depth of anesthesia, there is no way of measuring eﬀect site
concentrations of intravenous agents, thus presenting the potential for
awareness \[10\]. Various agents are available for use in TIVA,
including propofol, the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist
ketamine, α2-agonists such as dexmedetomidine, opioids, benzodiazepines,
and barbiturates. A common approach employs infusion of propofol
combined with boluses or an infusion of short-acting opioids (e.g.,
alfentanil, sufentanil, remifentanil). These agents are lipophilic and
distribute into lipid-rich tissues after prolonged infusion. This
results in prolonged context-sensitive halftimes, the time it takes for
blood or plasma drug concentrations to decrease by 50% after
discontinuation of drug administration, and delayed emergence may be
observed if this phenomenon is not accounted for. Of note, due to its
rapid metabolism by nonspeciﬁc plasma and tissue esterases, remifentanil
is exempt from this lengthening of contextsensitive half-time.

Neuromuscular Blockers Neuromuscular blocking drugs (NMBDs),
particularly nondepolarizing NMBDs, are used frequently in the
maintenance phase of anesthesia. These agents interrupt transmission of
nerve impulses at the neuromuscular junction, resulting in paralysis or
paresis. This provides immobility during surgical procedures to help
optimize working conditions. Commonly used nondepolarizing NMBDs include
pancuronium, vecuronium, rocuronium, atracurium, cisatracurium, and
mivacurium. The choice of NMBD is made considering the patient history
and the drugs’ characteristics. Of note, use of NMBDs has been shown to
increase the risk of awareness during surgery, and care must be taken to
ensure that patients are adequately anesthetized. Reversal of NMBDs is
necessary at the end of the procedure. This has been achieved
traditionally through the administration of an acetylcholinesterase
inhibitor (i.e., neostigmine), coupled with an anticholinergic agent
(i.e., glycopyrrolate) to prevent undesirable cholinergic side eﬀects
(i.e., bradycardia, bronchorrhea, bronchospasm, emesis, and diarrhea).
More recently, a γ-

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

145

cyclodextrin agent called sugammadex has been used to reverse certain
nondepolarizing NMBDs. This drug works by encapsulating and inactivating
the NMBDs and transporting them away from the neuromuscular junction.
Sugammadex works rapidly and can reverse even profound neuromuscular
blockade without untoward side eﬀects \[14\].

Monitors Monitors allow the physician to obtain data and interpret the
physiologic conditions patients are undergoing and the responses to
interventions performed by anesthesiology or surgical team members. The
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has adopted a standard for
basic monitors, mandating the use of monitors for ventilation,
oxygenation, circulation, and body temperature \[15\]. These standards
have been determined to provide the minimum amount of information about
the patient while undergoing anesthesia care.

Oxygenation The ASA requires that oxygenation of the patient is
monitored by pulse oximetry and that oxygen analyzers with low oxygen
concentration limit alarms are used throughout anesthetic
administration. Pulse oximetry involves light to determine the amount of
oxygen in the patient’s blood. Monitors can be placed on parts of the
body that allow the light to pass easily, such as the ﬁnger, nose, or
ear. Using the Beer–Lambert law, which relates solute concentration to
absorbance, two wavelengths of light can be measured – red correlating
with oxyhemoglobin at 660 nm, and infrared correlating with
deoxyhemoglobin at 940 nm. However, various conditions can alter the
accuracy of pulse oximetry, including patient movement, low blood ﬂow
conditions, dysfunctional hemoglobin such as methemoglobin and
carboxyhemoglobin, and intravascular dye administration \[15–18\].

Ventilation Capnographic waveform monitoring and end-tidal carbon
dioxide monitoring conﬁrm that patients undergoing anesthesia are
ventilating suﬃciently. In addition to oxygenation monitors, these aim
to ensure that patients are not receiving hypoxic mixtures of gases and
receiving adequate ventilation to prevent severe hypercarbia \[15–18\].

Circulation ECG monitoring in the operating room allows the anesthesia
provider to monitor the patient’s cardiac rhythm for abnormalities in
response to surgical manipulation, and to monitor for episodes of
ischemia. ECGs in

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

146

Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, et al.

the operating room at a minimum should be three lead. However, most
providers opt for a ﬁve-lead ECG, as monitoring precordial leads greatly
enhances the detection of ischemia. The addition of leads II, V4, and V5
increases the sensitivity from 75% with lead V5 alone to nearly 96% in
detecting ischemia \[15–18\]. Blood pressure monitoring, whether
noninvasive or invasive, is required at least every 3–5 minutes. In
cases where wide variations in blood pressures are expected or rigorous
control of blood pressures is required, direct arterial pressure
monitoring can provide closer monitoring of blood pressures at every
beat of the patient’s heart. The anesthesiology provider should attempt
to maintain the patient’s mean arterial pressure within 20% of the
patient’s preoperative baseline \[15–18\].

Temperature Temperature can be monitored by an exterior probe such as
axillary, or an interior probe such as oropharyngeal or nasal.
Anesthetics cause a decline in thermoregulatory function, as
redistribution eﬀects cause core heat loss. Core temperatures can
decrease from 1 to 1.5°C in the ﬁrst hour after induction. Although body
temperature is not the ﬁrst visible signal detecting MH in response to
anesthetics, monitoring a patient’s temperature is a way to avert
adverse consequences in anesthetic administration \[15–19\].

Emergence For patients to emerge from anesthesia and achieve successful
extubation, they must return to their baseline state of physiologic
function. They must regain their basic neurologic function to protect
their airway, demonstrate spontaneous, independent ventilation, and
often follow commands \[20–22\]. Before independent ventilation can be
established, the patient must have a patent and protected airway. This
is established through suctioning, head positioning, and often with
placement of airway adjunct tools, such as an oral airway, to clear the
airway from obstruction. The patient can demonstrate airway reﬂexes
through swallowing secretions, coughing, and gagging, indicating their
basic reﬂexes have been reestablished. To demonstrate intact airway
reﬂexes, the patient requires reversal of the paralytic and often
discontinued inhaled gases or intravenous anesthetic medications.
Through these measures, the patient will be able to regain function of
their ventilation and oxygenation, and thereby produce adequate
spontaneous minute ventilation \[20–23\]. In some cases, deep extubation
may be performed when coughing and straining must be avoided during
emergence. In that case, while the patient is

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

General Anesthesia Techniques in Clinical Practice

147

still under enough anesthetics to tolerate surgical stimuli, but can
demonstrate adequate spontaneous minute ventilation, the ETT can be
removed. The anesthesia provider in that case will apply oxygen via a
face mask as the patient gradually emerges. Options to reverse
neuromuscular blockade include anticholinesterase inhibitors such as
neostigmine, edrophonium, or pyridostigmine. These medications inhibit
acetylcholinesterase and thus prolong the existence of acetylcholine at
the motor end plate, thereby reversing the motor blockade. These
medications are paired with glycopyrrolate or atropine to prevent the
adverse side eﬀects of these drugs secondary to their muscarinic eﬀects.
In addition, for rocuronium and vecuronium, an alternative option
exists. Sugammadex, a novel cyclodextrin, reverses neuromuscular
blockade with two nondepolarizing muscle relaxants by binding the
molecules of the neuromuscular blocker, allowing for rapid removal of
these molecules from the plasma \[23–25\]. Peripheral nerve stimulation
or train-of-four (TOF) monitoring should be used to determine dosing for
neuromuscular blockade reversal. This involves a small electrical
current delivered to the patient to evaluate peripheral nerve activity
to attempt to quantify the amount of paralytic medication still in eﬀect
by a subjective quantitative method. Stimulation of the ulnar nerve and
monitoring of the adductor pollicis muscle are the preferred site, as
the nerve activity cannot be confounded by direct muscle stimulation;
however, in certain situations, access to the patient’s arms is not
available during surgical procedures secondary to surgical sites or
positioning. In such a situation, the facial nerve is often used for
monitoring. TOF measurements are not entirely accurate, as direct muscle
stimulation can occur and measurements are subjective to the examiner as
to the height of the twitch. Some newer methodology is available to
quantify the twitches in response to peripheral nerve stimulation;
however, they are not widely used \[23, 26, 27\].

Conclusion This chapter may guide the clinician providing GA to patients
in various scenarios. GA, deﬁned as medically induced loss of
consciousness with concurrent loss of protective reﬂexes and skeletal
muscle relaxation, is essential to the safe and successful performance
of many interventional and surgical therapies. This chapter discussed
the necessary methods behind GA, including preoperative evaluation,
speciﬁc preoperative tests, fasting and pharmacologic recommendations,
and induction of anesthesia (inhalational versus intravenous), as well
as airway management to include mask ventilation, SGAs, and endotracheal
intubation. Maintenance of the desired anesthetic depth and available
pharmacologic agents involved in inhalation

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

148

Mark R. Jones, Edward S. Alpaugh, Boris C. Anyama, et al.

anesthesia versus TIVA were reviewed, in addition to properly monitoring
the patient’s circulation, oxygenation and ventilation, and temperature.
Lastly, emergence from anesthesia and safe, appropriate conditions were
discussed.

References 1. El-Orbany M, Woehlck HJ. Diﬃcult mask ventilation. Anesth
Analg. 2009;109 (6):1870–80. DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e3181b5881c. 2.
Gordon J, Cooper RM, Parotto M. Supraglottic airway devices:
indications, contraindications and management. Minerva Anestesiol.
2018;84(3):389–97. DOI: 10.23736/S0375-9393.17.12112-7. 3. Hernandez MR,
Klock PA, Ovassapian A. Evolution of the extraglottic airway: a review
of its history, applications, and practical tips for success. Anesth
Analg. 2012;114(2):349–68. DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e31823b6748. 4. Haas
CF, Eakin RM, Konkle MA, Blank R. Endotracheal tubes: old and new.
Respir Care. 2014;59(6):933–55. DOI: 10.4187/respcare.02868. 5. Malhotra
SK. Practice guidelines for management of the diﬃcult airway. In: SK
Malhotra, VP Kumra, B Radhakrishnan, SM Basu, eds. Practice Guidelines
in Anesthesia. New Delhi: Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers; 2016, pp.
127–31. DOI: 10.5005/jp/books/12644\_18. 6. Gray AW. Endotracheal tubes.
Clin Chest Med. 2003;24(3):379–87. DOI: 10.1016/ S0272-5231(03)00052-2.
7. Hurford WE. Techniques for endotracheal intubation. Int Anesthesiol
Clin. 2000;38 (3):1–28. DOI: 10.1097/00004311-200007000-00003. 8. Cooper
RM. Strengths and limitations of airway techniques. Anesthesiol Clin.
2015;33(2):241–55. DOI: 10.1016/j.anclin.2015.02.006. 9. Koerner IP,
Brambrink AM. Fiberoptic techniques. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol.
2005;19(4):611–21. DOI: 10.1016/j.bpa.2005.07.006. 10. Walton TEF,
Palmer J. Maintenance of anaesthesia. Anaesth Intensive Care Med.
2020;21(3):121–6. DOI: 10.1016/j.mpaic.2019.12.007. 11. Brown EN, Pavone
KJ, Naranjo M. Multimodal general anesthesia: theory and practice.
Anesth Analg. 2018;127(5):1246–58. DOI: 10.1213/ ANE.0000000000003668.
12. McKay RE. Inhaled anesthetics. In: MC Pardo, Jr, RD Miller, eds.
Basics of Anesthesia, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018, pp.
83–103. DOI: 10.1016/ B978-0-323-40115-9.00007-4. 13. Perouansky M,
Pearce RA, Hemmings HC, Franks NP. Inhaled anesthetics: Mechanisms of
action. In: MA Gropper, ed. Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th ed.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.010 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

10

Postanesthesia Care Unit Iliana Ramirez-Saldana

Introduction The postanesthesia care unit (PACU) or recovery unit is the
place where patients go to after leaving the operating room (OR) and
before being discharged home or to the wards. Monitoring the patients
for common complications is of utmost importance in the immediate
postoperative period. This requires the presence of trained personnel
and staﬀ that can quickly identify common problems and treat the
patient. Patients must have a return to baseline before getting
discharged home. Emergency equipment and drugs should be readily
available at all times.

Phases of Postoperative Care The PACU, recovery room, or postoperative
care unit are staﬀed by nurses speciﬁcally trained in the care of
patients who have just received general, neuraxial, or peripheral blocks
or monitored anesthesia care types of anesthesia. They should have
expertise in recognizing and handling the most common complications
after surgery. Nurses in the PACU are trained in airway management
skills and must be certiﬁed in advanced cardiac life support. Usually
patients in the PACU are under the medical direction of an
anesthesiologist \[1, 2\]. • Phase 1: Marks the beginning of the
immediate postoperative period. Typically, nursing care is one nurse to
two patients. It is the position of the American Society of
PeriAnesthesia Nurses (ASPN) that the number of patients assigned to a
nurse in phase 1 should depend on multiple factors, including acuity
level, complexity of care, comorbidities, and the American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) status, among other factors \[2\]. Vital signs
are recorded every 15 minutes or more often if the patient condition
warrants. In some institutions, critical care patients go directly from
the OR back to the intensive care unit (ICU), bypassing the PACU. •
Phase 2: Typical staﬃng consists of one nurse to three patients. Some
monitored anesthesia care (MAC) cases performed on ASA I or II patients
can be fast-tracked into phase 2 directly from the OR. During this
phase, 151

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

152

Iliana Ramirez-Saldana

the patient and caregivers are educated for care at home or prepared for
extended observation. • Phase 3: It is an extended care phase staﬀed by
one nurse to 3–5 patients. Patients are ready to leave the recovery unit
but might wait here until a bed is available.

ASA Standards for Postoperative Care 1. Postanesthesia management should
be provided to any patient receiving MAC or regional or general
anesthesia. An anesthesiologist should be responsible for the
supervision and care of PACU patients. 2. The patient should be
transported by a member of the anesthesia care team who can continually
monitor, evaluate, and treat any condition that might arise until
handing oﬀ to the PACU nurse. 3. A verbal report should be provided to
the nurse receiving the patient that includes the patient’s past medical
history, allergies, relevant home medications, surgery undergone, any
airway issues, intraoperative course and medications or infusions,
pertinent laboratory results or radiological ﬁlm reports, ﬂuid balance,
blood products administered, lines and intravenous cannulae or
intravenous catheters, whether peripheral or central, regional or
neuraxial procedures, complications, concerns, and pending tasks for the
immediate postoperative period. This is the moment when the nurse is
alerted about any particular concerns. 4. The patient will be
continually evaluated in this setting by the nurse for any signs of
deterioration. Vital signs are recorded at set intervals, including
arterial saturation, blood pressure, respiratory rate, cardiac rhythm,
temperature, and mental status. Assessment of pain, nausea, and vomiting
should be routine during emergence and recovery. 5. A physician is
responsible for discharging the patient from the PACU, and the name
should be noted on the record \[3\].

Transport and Delivery to the Postanesthesia Care Unit Patients should
receive supplemental oxygen during transport to delay the hypoxemia that
can ensue from residual eﬀects of anesthetics, opioids, and
neuromuscular blocking agents administered. Depending on the stability
of the patient, a pulse oximeter, ECG, and blood pressure monitors may
suﬃce for transport. Vigilance is always required. Upon arrival to the
PACU, a report is provided to the nurse as described previously. The
anesthesia provider places orders for any patient’s needs that might
arise such as pain and antiemetic medications. Also, orders for
supplemental oxygen and neuraxial anesthesia when applicable should be
available. Monitoring of vital signs at

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Postanesthesia Care Unit

153

regular intervals, usually every 5 minutes and then every 15 minutes,
continues. The patient’s breathing patterns, airway patency, respiratory
rate, saturations, blood pressure, temperature, pain, and level of
consciousness are routinely assessed.

Most Common Problems Encountered in the PACU Surgery can trigger
inﬂammation due to tissue damage, and anesthesia can cause alterations
in hemodynamics that can further compromise organs. Whether patients are
healthy or not, many systems are aﬀected by these alterations, giving
rise to potential problems (see Table 10.1). 1. Hypertension: The goal
is to identify the most probable cause and treat accordingly. The
patient might be asymptomatic or complain of visual changes or
headaches, or can feel short of breath and restless. Some blood pressure
medications are held prior to surgery. If this is the case, consider
restarting. Always review the patient’s chart to look at the baseline
pressure to target your goal. Also, consider the context and note any
other associated signs and symptoms that might point you to a diﬀerent
source. For instance, examine the pupils and alertness level, which can
help you rule out a developing intracranial pathology. Ask the patient
if they are having pain and use a number scale, for instance, to
quantify. If so, titrate pain medication to eﬀect. By looking at the
history, you can verify if the patient has a history of alcohol or drug
abuse contributing to withdrawal signs. Consider ﬂuid overload or
transfusion-associated cardiac overload. Examine the suprapubic area if
the patient has had no urine output after neuraxial anesthesia. A
bladder ultrasound can be helpful. Revise the drugs given to the patient
recently, and make sure that vasopressor infusions are held or checked
for correct concentration and dosing. 2. Hypotension: Keep in mind that
cardiac output will depend on heart rate and stroke volume. Blood
pressure is the product of cardiac output and systemic vascular
resistance. One way to approach this is by considering whether the
patient is volume-depleted, there is a delivery problem, the vessels are
dilated, or the pump is failing. This can give you a start on how to
navigate and ﬁnd the culprit. Check the intraoperative record for ﬂuid
balance and estimated blood loss. Review the urine output and recent
laboratory results, including hemoglobin. Look at the drains and
surgical incisions for swelling or frank bleeding. If the lungs sound
clear, consider a ﬂuid bolus and observe the response. Consider whether
your patient can tolerate the Trendelenberg position while you continue
to troubleshoot. Be mindful of patients who are known to have poor
cardiac and/or valvular dysfunction, as deterioration can rapidly ensue
after a ﬂuid challenge or changes in position. Consider recently
dialyzed patients who are volume-depleted. Look at the ECG for
conduction abnormalities; ask the

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

154

Iliana Ramirez-Saldana

Table 10.1 Problems encountered in the PACU, with a summary of the
potential reasons for each problem System

Problem

Possible reasons

Cardiac

Hypertension Hypotension Arrhythmias

Preexisting hypertension, pain, hypercarbia, bladder distension, drugs –
methergine, ﬂuid overload, withdrawal, increased ICP Volume depletion,
ongoing bleeding, sepsis, arrhythmias, heart failure, allergic reaction,
myocardial infarction, neuraxial anesthesia, tamponade, pneumothorax,
pulmonary embolism Electrolyte imbalances, pacemaker/deﬁbrillator issue,
toxicity, acidosis, hypoxemia

Renal

Oliguria Anuria Polyuria

Volume depletion Residual neuraxial anesthesia eﬀects, obstruction
Diabetes insipidus

Neurological

Delirium Stroke Somnolence

Secondary to drugs received, preexisting dementia Intracranial bleed due
to HTN, surgery, or blood thinners Hypoglycemia, residual anesthetic
eﬀects, hypermagnesemia, hypercarbia

Respiratory

Hypoxia and hypercarbia

Residual NMBDs, atelectasis, opioid overdose, benzodiazepine overdose,
pneumothorax, asthma exacerbation, airway obstruction, edema, allergic
reactions, pulmonary edema, neck hematomas, subcutaneous emphysema

Other Drug-related

Allergic reactions, PONV, shivering, Parkinsonlike

Injuries

Teeth, nerve, lip, cornea, nose

Pain

Inﬁltrated IV, failed block, high tolerance, inadequate dose

Recall

Light anesthesia, cardiac surgery, NMBDs, substance abuse, young age,
emergency surgery

ICP, intracranial pressure; HTN, hypertension; NMBD, neuromuscular
blocking drug; PONV, postoperative nausea and vomiting.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Postanesthesia Care Unit

155

patient if they have chest pain, and look for other signs that can
suggest a cardiac event. Also, consider allergic/anaphylactic reactions
and examine the skin; listen for stridor, and look for signs of
angioedema. If the patient had neuraxial anesthesia, review the details
on record. In the case of a patient who received a blood transfusion,
consider a transfusion reaction. In patients who had a procedure at the
electrophysiology laboratory or trauma patients, consider tamponade.
Consider pneumothorax, and examine those patients who had regional
blocks, central lines, laparoscopic surgery, and trauma to the chest,
for example. For those on a ventilator, check the positive
end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) settings. Sepsis can already be present
in many patients who come to the OR, including those with obstructive
kidney stones, and also in patients with burns and necrotizing
fasciitis, among others. Look for a transesophageal echocardiogram in
the chart, if available, and consider a cardiac consult for
cardioversion if deemed appropriate. Consider antiarrhythmics and
inotropic agents, and consider placement of invasive monitors such as an
arterial line for continuous monitoring and for frequent laboratory
draws when appropriate. When persistent hypotension ensues despite
treatment, consider adrenal causes and hypothyroidism and plan for
possible transfer to the ICU. 3. Arrhythmias: Some benign arrhythmias
might be a consequence of electrolyte imbalances. This can be easily
ruled out by sending a venous gas sample or, if an arterial line is
already in place, by sending an arterial sample. Preexisting cardiac
conditions, sympathetic discharge from surgical procedures, and acidosis
can also aﬀect electrical conduction through the heart. For
bradycardias, consider the residual eﬀects of beta-blockers, reversal
agents, and opioids. Sinus bradycardia with a sustained blood pressure
usually does not require treatment. Always assess your patient’s mental
status and look for other signs or symptoms. Look at the medical record
for administered medications. Always verify infusion concentrations,
dosages, and pump settings. Also consider the patient’s history, as
athletes tend to have normal sinus bradycardia. Irregular bradycardia
with long pauses, missed beats, and low blood pressure might be the ﬁrst
sign of a third-degree atrioventricular block. These patients should be
placed on a transcutaneous pacing monitor, and cardiology should be
immediately consulted for further workup. For those patients who had a
pacer or deﬁbrillator setting changes before going to surgery, make sure
to restore back to the presurgical settings before discharge home, and
ensure that it is working. In the case of tachycardia, rule out pain,
fever, low preload state, reversal agents, bleeding, and malignant
hyperthermia, among many others. 4. Oliguria/anuria/polyuria: Oliguria
is deﬁned as the state in which a patient makes &lt;0.5 mL/(kg hr) of
urine. Consider if the patient is not making urine because of
intravascular ﬂuid depletion, tubular necrosis at the level of the

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

156

Iliana Ramirez-Saldana

nephron unit, or obstruction to drainage. The most common cause will be
ﬂuid restriction techniques used where the intravascular space remains
depleted. Consider administering a ﬂuid challenge of 250–500 mL of
crystalloid, and assess. Special precaution and slow infusion are
recommended for patients known to have poor cardiac function or renal
failure. A physical examination and chart review for laboratory results
and context should take place. Administration of diuretics might not be
indicated in every case and the eﬀects will be temporary if the injury
is at the level of the nephron. In this last scenario, further
investigation by a specialist might be indicated. Renal hypoperfusion,
toxins, and trauma might be responsible for intraparenchymal damage to
the kidneys. Lastly, it is important to check that if a foley catheter
is in place, it is not obstructed or dislodged. After prostate surgery,
for example, large amounts of clots might obstruct drainage. Anuria is
more commonly seen in known advanced stages of renal failure in patients
undergoing dialysis. Sometimes it can also be seen as a result of a
spinal anesthetic. In this case, straight catheterization is recommended
until the spinal anesthetic wears oﬀ and the bladder regains normal
function. Polyuria is seen after large volumes of ﬂuid administration,
diuresis with furosemide or osmotic diuretics, diabetes insipidus, and
nonoliguric renal failure. It is important to monitor these patients for
hemodynamic instability and electrolyte imbalances. 5. Delirium: Most
commonly seen in the elderly population, those with preexisting dementia
and psychiatric disorders, and drug-dependent patients. These patients
present very agitated as they emerge, often requiring multiple persons
to keep them from harming themselves. They can also be lethargic and
disoriented. A number of drugs have been cited as a contributing factor,
such as benzodiazepines, anticholinergics, opioids, large doses of
metoclopramide, and ketamine, among others. It is important to rule out
hypoxemia as the cause of agitation, bladder distension, electrolyte
derangements, preexisting encephalopathies, preexisting delirium, and
brain injuries, among others. 6. Stroke: Certain surgeries have a higher
incidence of stroke. Cardiac, carotid, and intracranial surgeries, as
well as polytrauma patients, have the highest risk. Vigilance and good
clinical judgment are critical to recognizing some of the signs and
symptoms of a stroke. When suspected, the stroke/neuro team should be
immediately contacted as the outcomes are directly related to the time
to intervention. The patient can present with slurred speech, facial
asymmetry, visual disturbances, confusion, and paralysis. Blood pressure
and airway control is warranted in some instances. Look for any recent
administration of anticoagulants and the presence of dysrhythmias. 7.
Somnolence: Hypoglycemia, hypothermia, and hypermagnesemia can lead to
somnolence. Do a ﬁnger stick to check glucose. Check the temperature and
provide the patient with warm blankets. Check magnesium levels to

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Postanesthesia Care Unit

157

avoid toxicity in those receiving an infusion (preeclampsia). A patient
who is hypoventilating, with high carbon dioxide levels, can also become
somnolent. Check saturations and draw an arterial blood gas if there is
a suspicion of hypercarbia. Always know where your reintubation
equipment is, in case you need it. 8. Hypoxia: The pulse oximeter should
be one of the ﬁrst monitors to be connected to the patient upon arrival
to the PACU. Mild hypoxemia on room air is common in patients recovering
from anesthesia. Sometimes airway obstruction by the tongue can be
resolved by gentle jaw thrust or a nasal/oral airway. If the neck was a
site of surgery, examine the patient for an enlarging neck hematoma and
note the output on the drain when present. The attending physician and
surgeon should be notiﬁed immediately of this, as it might warrant a
return to the operating suite. When hypoxia is present, sit the patient
up to increase the functional residual capacity if the type of surgery
allows for it, and provide supplemental oxygen via nasal cannulae or
other device. Titrate the oxygen level to achieve saturations near
preoperative levels. Decreases in functional residual capacity and
atelectasis are the most common cause of hypoxemia postoperatively.
Encourage the patient to take deep breaths and provide suction if
needed. Patients with chronic lung conditions might require oxygen
supplementation for longer duration. If the patient’s condition does not
improve after maximal supplementation via a nonrebreather mask, for
instance, and an arterial blood gas sample indicates continuous
hypoxemia, consider reintubating the patient. For patients with
obstructive sleep apnea, a trial of continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) ﬁrst might make a
diﬀerence. Make sure that you have reversed respiratory depressant drugs
such as opioids, benzodiazepines, and neuromuscular blocking drugs.
Think of the type of surgery the patient just underwent and consider
atelectasis, mucus plugs, or gauze left behind in the airway during ear,
nose, and throat procedures. Consider a CXR that can rule out the
presence of aspiration, pneumothorax, or excess ﬂuid in the lungs.
Consider drawing blood to make sure hemoglobin is not at critical
levels. 9. Hypercarbia: Hypoventilation leads to hypercarbia, and so
does splinting. A patient who becomes hypercarbic (PaCO2 &gt;60 mmHg)
becomes obtunded over time if not treated, which might be the reason why
you are called in the ﬁrst place. Examine the patient; assess their
alertness level and listen to the breath sounds. Take note of the
breathing pattern and frequency, and note the abdominal and thoracic
movements. Revise the medications and the quantities that the patient
has received over a period of time. Palpate the patient’s chest in long
laparoscopic cases and assess for subcutaneous emphysema. When
appropriate and suspected, use reversal agents for opioids,
benzodiazepines, and neuromuscular blocking drugs.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

158

Iliana Ramirez-Saldana

However, titrate these agents in small increments to avoid increases in
sympathetic tone that can lead to hypertension and myocardial ischemia.
Patients with obstructive sleep apnea might require assisted ventilation
via a mask for a period of time. Assess for hypoventilation due to
splinting and pain, and consider regional anesthesia if applicable. Use
one of many methods for the patient to score pain. If hypoxia or
hypercarbia are left untreated, they might quickly progress to
cardiovascular and respiratory collapse requiring a higher level of
management. 10. Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV): This is a
commonly encountered experience, which is multifactorial in nature. Some
of the patient factors include young age, female gender, history of
motion sickness, or prior history of PONV. Anesthetic factors, such as
general anesthesia with volatile agents, nitrous oxide, and use of
opioids, are also risk factors. In the case of a spinal anesthetic with
sudden hypotension, this can trigger the chemoreceptor trigger zone in
the area postrema of the brain, causing nausea. In this latter case,
administering drugs that can increase blood pressure, such as
phenylephrine, can resolve the symptoms. Some of the surgical procedures
that present as a higher risk factor for PONV are strabismus, breast,
and laparoscopic surgeries. In general, patients with multiple risk
factors should receive prophylaxis as their risk is higher \[4\]. Use of
multiple agents that act on diﬀerent receptors is more eﬀective than use
of multiple doses of the same class of drug \[4, 5\]. Some examples of
the drugs used are dexamethasone, ondansetron, and scopolamine patch.
Consider the individual patient and the side eﬀect proﬁle before
choosing a drug. 11. Pain: The patient with pain will be anxious and
clearly uncomfortable, and will manifest high blood pressure and often
tachycardia. Multiple scoring systems for pain exist that can be used to
help the patient communicate the severity of their pain. This could be
due to a failed nerve block, a high tolerance of narcotics due to drug
use, or insuﬃcient quantities of opioids given intraoperatively for the
type of surgery. Use a combination of nonnarcotics and narcotics to
treat pain. Consider a patient’s renal and liver function during your
selection, and be aware of whether the patient uses agonist/antagonist
medications at home as part of their treatment plan. Consider an
intravenous bolus of ketamine on a case-by-case basis or a postoperative
regional block if applicable. Sickle cell patients who suﬀer an acute
attack after surgery best respond to Dilaudid. 12. Shivering and
hypothermia: Heat gets redistributed from the core to the peripheral
compartments, causing hypothermia. Added to this are the vasodilatory
eﬀects of anesthetics, the cool ambient temperature, and the large
exposure of body parts that can all contribute to signiﬁcant
hypothermia. Shivering is the body’s response to increase its
temperature.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Postanesthesia Care Unit

159

Use of forced air warming devices has been eﬀective at increasing body
temperature. Be aware that shivering increases cardiac output, oxygen
consumption, and carbon dioxide production, which might not be well
tolerated by patients with fragile cardiac and pulmonary systems. Small
doses of meperidine can reduce or stop shivering \[5\].

Discharge Criteria Before a patient is discharged home, it is important
that they meet certain criteria and each case be considered individually
\[5\]. The patient must be awake and alert. Some patients with baseline
dementia or neurologic pathologies will not be oriented. The patient’s
vital signs must be within preoperative values for at least 30 minutes.
If they came from home on room air, they must be able to sustain their
baseline saturations on room air for at least 15 minutes. Be very
vigilant with patients with obstructive sleep apnea, and make sure you
follow your institutional protocol for discharge of these patients. Make
sure that pain is under control and nausea has been addressed. For
patients who received regional or neuraxial anesthesia, it is important
to document regression of their sensory and motor blockade. Patients
should be educated about fall prevention when a block has been
performed, with or without continuous catheters in place, and given a
knee brace when indicated. They should also be alerted about the
prolongation of a neuraxial block that might indicate the presence of a
hematoma in the subdural or epidural space. According to the ASA
practice guidelines for postanesthetic care, it is agreed that having an
adult accompany the patient home should be mandatory as it increases
patient comfort and satisfaction, as well as reduces adverse outcomes.
Urination before discharge should only be mandatory for selected
day-surgery patients. ASA members were equivocal on whether drinking
ﬂuids before discharge should be mandatory and it should be done rather
on a case-by-case basis. Lastly, patients should remain in the recovery
unit until cardiac and respiratory issues have resolved and are
sustained before discharge home. Minimum stays are not required if the
patient is in a stable condition. A physician should be in charge of the
discharge home order \[5\].

References 1. American Association of Nurse Anesthesiology.
Postanesthesia care practice considerations. 2019. Available from:
www.aana.com/search?keyword=postanesthesia% 20care 2. American Society
of PeriAnesthesia Nurses. 2017–2018 Perianesthesia Nursing Standards,
Practice Recommendations and Interpretive Statements. Cherry Hill, NJ:
American Society of PeriAnesthesia Nurses; 2016.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.011 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

11a

Regional Anesthesia: Blocks of the Upper and Lower Extremities Peter
Amato, Brittany Deiling, Erik Helander, Jinlei Li, Chikezie N. Okeagu,
Michael McManus, Annemarie Senekal, Christopher M. Sharrow, Ashley
Shilling, Alan David Kaye, and Michael P. Webb

Introduction A regional block, also known as a localized block, is a
type of anesthetic that blocks nerve transmission to prevent or
alleviate pain. Regional anesthesia is the process of injecting an
anesthetic substance into a peripheral nerve and inhibiting transmission
to avoid or treat pain. It is distinct from general anesthesia in that
it does not alter the patient’s level of awareness to alleviate pain.
There are numerous advantages of regional anesthesia over general
anesthesia, including avoidance of airway manipulation, lower dosages,
fewer systemic medication adverse eﬀects, shorter recovery period, and
considerably less discomfort following surgery. Postoperative recovery
time has been demonstrated to be signiﬁcantly shortened because of
signiﬁcantly lowered pain levels and early involvement in physical
therapy. Regional anesthesia can be used in combination with general
anesthesia, postoperatively, and often for treatment of a variety of
acute and chronic pain problems.

Upper Extremity/Brachial Plexus Blocks Interscalene The interscalene
block (ISB) targets the brachial plexus at the level of the roots and
trunks. This block traditionally could be done with a landmark approach
and/or nerve stimulator but is now routinely accomplished with the use
of ultrasound (US) guidance. ISBs are often performed for analgesia in
surgeries involving the shoulder such as total shoulder arthroplasties
and rotator cuﬀ repairs, proximal humerus fractures, or surgeries of the
distal clavicle. This approach reliably blocks 161

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

162

Peter Amato, Brittany Deiling, Erik Helander, et al.

the superior and middle trunks of the brachial plexus but will often
result in sparing of the inferior trunk (C8–T1), commonly termed “ulnar
sparing.” To perform the ISB, the patient is placed in either a
semi-sitting or a lateral position. If the patient is placed in the
semi-sitting position, the head is turned towards the contralateral
side. Identiﬁcation of the target anatomy is done using a high-frequency
US probe beginning at either the supraclavicular fossa or the cricoid
cartilage. If starting at the supraclavicular fossa, ﬁrst the subclavian
artery is identiﬁed, with the brachial plexus sitting superior and
lateral to the artery. Then the probe is slid cranially, tracking the
brachial plexus. Another starting point is to place the probe on the
lateral neck at the level of the cricoid cartilage (C6). The brachial
plexus can be identiﬁed between the anterior and middle scalene muscles
as a rounded, stacked structure resembling a “snowman” or “stop light.”
Injections of 10–20 mL of local anesthetic are often used. This block is
performed in the neck and in proximity to the cervical sympathetic
chain, recurrent laryngeal nerve, and phrenic nerve. Thus, it can result
in Horner syndrome or hoarseness, and has a near 100% incidence of
blocking the ipsilateral phrenic nerve. The resulting hemidiaphragm
paralysis often goes unnoticed in healthy patients but can make it
potentially unsuitable for patients with underlying respiratory disease.
Other complications include vertebral artery injection, which may result
in immediate seizures with injection of local anesthetic, and
intrathecal injection resulting in total spinal anesthesia,
pneumothorax, and permanent nerve injury.

Supraclavicular The supraclavicular block (SB) is a block of the
brachial plexus at the supraclavicular fossa that provides surgical
anesthesia and analgesia to the upper extremity. The block requires
deposition of local anesthetic around the brachial plexus as it courses
through the neck in close association with the subclavian artery. This
block is often referred to as the “spinal of the arm” due to its
reliability and provision of excellent anesthesia for the entire length
of the arm. Prior to the advent of US-guided regional anesthesia, this
block was rarely performed, owing to the proximity of the brachial
plexus to the dome of the pleura. US reinvigorated clinicians to use
this block routinely, as direct visualization of the plexus, pleura, and
the ﬁrst rib provided a wide margin of safety. The relative superﬁcial
depth of the brachial plexus at this location also provided for good
imaging of the needle, further enhancing the safety of the SB. The
plexus can be readily seen in close proximity to the subclavian artery
as the latter courses over the ﬁrst rib and between the anterior and
middle scalene muscles. The ﬁrst rib is seen beneath the artery and
plexus as

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Upper and Lower Extremities

163

a hyperechoic structure superﬁcial to the mobile, “sliding,” and
hyperechoic pleura. The upper, middle, and lower trunks of the brachial
plexus coalesce into multiple round, hyperechoic structures within an
investing fascia that sits lateral to the artery. The SB targets the
brachial plexus at the level of the trunks and divisions. The
practitioner needs to be aware of the path of the dorsal scapular
artery, which often lies close to the plexus and can sometimes lie in
the path of the needle trajectory. This block is most commonly performed
under US guidance with an inplane approach. The block can be performed
in a supine or semi-recumbent position, with the patient’s head turned
to the contralateral side. A highfrequency, linear probe (10–12 MHz) is
commonly employed and placed in the midpoint of the supraclavicular
fossa and angled caudally to best visualize a cross-section of the
subclavian artery. Color Doppler scanning can be used here to visualize
any vessels that may lie in the anticipated needle trajectory, including
the dorsal scapular artery, which can sometimes be seen arching over the
brachial plexus. The needle is brought in plane to the deepest aspect of
the brachial plexus and is associated with a palpable “pop” as the
investing fascia of the plexus is pierced. A volume of approximately 20
mL of local anesthetic is required to achieve surgical anesthesia of the
arm. Traditionally, local anesthetic is deposited close to the
subclavian artery just above the ﬁrst rib to ensure that there is spread
of the drug in the deepest part of the plexus to avoid “ulnar sparing.”
This is often referred to as “the corner pocket” and provides a
characteristic appearance of the artery peeling oﬀ the ﬁrst rib and
spreading around the plexus. To ensure complete spread of the
anesthetic, injections at multiple sites around the plexus may be
necessary. Complications of the SB include intravascular injection,
nerve injury, Horner syndrome, hemidiaphragm paralysis (phrenic nerve
blockade), and pneumothorax.

Axillary The axillary brachial plexus block is used for surgery of the
elbow, forearm, and hand. This block derives its name from the approach
used to perform it, as the nerves branched from the brachial plexus are
accessed through the axilla. The axillary block is relatively easy to
perform and mitigates some of the risks associated with comparable
blocks such as the ISB (spinal cord or vertebral artery puncture) and SB
(pneumothorax). The risk of phrenic nerve palsy is also considerably
less than with brachial plexus blocks performed above the level of the
clavicle. There are several techniques by which the block can be
performed; these include transarterial approach, via nerve stimulation,
and via US-guided techniques. US guidance is often favored as it allows
for direct visualization of the nerves to be targeted, the needle tip,
and the distribution of local anesthetic. To perform the block under US
guidance, the arm is abducted 90°; then the insertion of the pectoralis
major onto the humerus is palpated,

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

164

Peter Amato, Brittany Deiling, Erik Helander, et al.

and the transducer is placed distal to this point, perpendicular to the
axis of the arm. The axillary artery, the conjoint tendon, and the
terminal branches of the brachial plexus can be brought into view by
sliding the transducer proximally. Three of the nerves to be blocked are
located directly adjacent to the axillary artery – the median nerve
superiorly, the ulnar nerve inferiorly, and the radial nerve
posteriorly/laterally. Local anesthetic should be distributed between
the nerves and the artery to ensure distribution within the
neurovascular bundle. The musculocutaneous nerve is located either
between the coracobrachialis and biceps muscles or within the
coracobrachialis muscle itself. For this reason, vigilance on the part
of the operator is required to avoid an incomplete block. It can be
identiﬁed by its characteristic medial to lateral course in the axilla,
as well as by its characteristic change in shape as it courses through
the axilla (round adjacent to the artery, ﬂat within the
coracobrachialis muscle, and triangular after exiting the muscle).

Intercostobrachial The intercostobrachial nerve (ICBN) block is commonly
performed as a supplemental block in conjunction with blocks of the
brachial plexus to obtain total upper arm analgesia. The ICBN supplies
cutaneous sensation to the upper half of the medial/posterior arm and a
portion of the anterior axilla. The nerve primarily originates from the
second thoracic nerve but can have contributions from T1 and T3. As it
is not part of the brachial plexus, it is not anesthetized when blocks
of the brachial plexus are performed. Blocking of the ICBN may help to
alleviate pain caused by tourniquet application to the upper arm, a
common practice during surgeries of the arm, forearm, and hand. It is
also useful in procedures involving the medial/posterior upper arm
and/or for anterior arthroscopic port placement. The block is typically
performed by subcutaneously injecting 2–5 mL of local anesthetic
superiorly and inferiorly along the axillary crease with a ﬁne-bore
needle. Alternatively, the block can be performed under US guidance. One
method of achieving this involves externally rotating and abducting the
shoulder 90°, placing the probe over the posteromedial axilla, and
visualizing the ICBN just posterior to the axillary artery and vein, and
just deep to the superﬁcial fascia. Placing the probe too anteriorly may
result in inadvertent visualization of the medial cutaneous nerve of the
arm, median nerve, or ulnar nerve.

Lower Limbs Femoral Nerve Block and Adductor Canal Block The femoral
nerve is one of the largest nerves from the lumbar plexus. This nerve
supplies a large portion of the lower extremity. It travels along the
anteromedial thigh, traversing the femoral triangle and adductor canal,
and

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Upper and Lower Extremities

165

terminates as the saphenous nerve – a pure sensory branch. The femoral
nerve and its branches innervate the anterior thigh above the knee joint
and the medial side of the lower leg and ankle. The extent of the
saphenous distribution in the ankle is variable, potentially including
the entire medial malleolus, and this must be considered in the regional
anesthetic approaches to foot and ankle surgery. Indications for femoral
nerve block (FNB) and adductor canal block (ACB) include partial or
complete pain control for the anterior thigh and the medial side of the
lower leg, such as partial or total knee arthroplasty (TKA), knee
ligamentous procedures such as anterior cruciate ligament repair (ACLR),
patella tendon repair, and tibial plateau fracture repair. Typical
volumes used in FNB and ACB are around 20–40 mL, with lower
concentrations (0.2% ropivacaine, 0.25% bupivacaine) for motor-sparing
block or higher concentrations (0.5% ropivacaine, 0.5% bupivacaine) of
local anesthetics for a more complete sensory and motor block. The FNB
can be performed at the level of the inguinal crease level with a linear
transducer. At this level, the neurovascular contents of the femoral
triangle can be visualized. Under US guidance, the femoral nerve sits
lateral to the femoral artery and vein, below the fascia lata and
iliaca, and superﬁcial to the iliopsoas muscle. The ACB targets the
saphenous nerve and, dependent on the level at which it is performed,
the nerve to the vastus medialis. Local anesthetic is deposited into the
adductor canal between the sartorius and the adductor longus muscle in
the middle third of the thigh under direct US guidance with a linear
transducer. The ACB has increasingly replaced the FNB in procedures
around or below the knee such as TKA, ACLR, and ankle surgeries, largely
due to its ability to preserve quadriceps muscle strength and facilitate
early ambulation, while maintaining similar level of analgesia as the
FNB. The FNB has retained its indication for pain control in procedures
or pathology more proximal to the adductor canal, such as procedures
around the hip and proximal femur.

Obturator Nerve Block The obturator nerve is a major branch from the
lumbar plexus that provides motor and sensory innervation to the
adductor muscles in the thigh, and sensory innervation to the skin over
the medial surface of the thigh up to the posterior–medial knee. The
sensory distribution of this nerve makes its blockade valuable in hip
and knee analgesia. The obturator nerve block (ONB) has been used in
acute pain management after several types of procedures around the knee,
such as total knee replacement and ACLR, where it has been shown to
improve postoperative analgesia. In addition, the ONB has been shown to
be eﬀective in acute pain management after hip fracture surgery in
conjunction with the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (LFCN) block,
likely due to the blockade eﬀect of the articular branch of the
obturator nerve that innervates

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

166

Peter Amato, Brittany Deiling, Erik Helander, et al.

the anteromedial hip joint capsule. Several approaches of US-guided ONB
have been proposed. Ergonomically, the patient is positioned supine,
with a linear transducer employed. In the distal ONB, a volume of 10–15
mL of local anesthetic is injected into the interfascial space between
the pectineus/ adductor longus and the adductor brevis muscles to block
the anterior branch, and between the adductor brevis and adductor magnus
muscles to block the posterior branch. Alternatively, a single injection
of local anesthetic in a volume of 5–10 mL can be injected into the
interfascial plane between the pectineus and obturator externus muscles
to block the obturator nerve at its conﬂuence before it divides into two
branches. It is worth mentioning speciﬁc block complications germane to
the ONB, owing to the particular location of these branches and the
potential for unfamiliarity with the landmarks and sonoanatomy. These
include penetration of the pelvic cavity and subsequent perforation of
the bladder or rectum, as well as perforation of other surrounding
structures, such as the obturator vessels, resulting in visceral organ
injury or hematoma formation. Corona mortis, a retropubic anastomosis
between the external iliac and obturator arteries, is present in 10% of
individuals and, if perforated, can cause extensive hemorrhage that is
diﬃcult to control. The medial circumﬂex femoral vessels that travel
along the obturator branches between the pectineus, obturator externus,
adductor brevis, and adductor magnus must be carefully avoided, as they
may lie in the needle path.

Sciatic Nerve Block The sciatic nerve is the largest peripheral nerve in
the body. It originates from the lumbosacral plexus (L4–5 and S1–3) and
provides sensory and motor innervation to the lower extremity. The
sciatic nerve exits the pelvis through the greater sciatic foramen,
inferior to the piriformis, and descends between the greater trochanter
of the femur and the ischial tuberosity. The nerve lies deep to the
gluteus maximus and courses down the midline of the posterior thigh
towards the popliteal fossa. Upon reaching the popliteal fossa, the
sciatic nerve branches into the common peroneal nerve (CPN) and tibial
nerve (TN). The bifurcation typically occurs 5–12 cm from the popliteal
crease, although it may occur more proximally. The smaller CPN branches
laterally and descends along the head and neck of the ﬁbula. It gives oﬀ
articular branches to the knee joint and branches to the sural nerve
before dividing into its terminal components: the superﬁcial and deep
peroneal nerves. The larger tibial component descends vertically through
the fossa, giving oﬀ many collateral branches, before splitting into its
terminal branches, the medial and lateral plantar nerves. The sciatic
nerve and its branches innervate the posterior aspect of the knee, the
hamstring muscles, and the entire lower limb below the knee, with

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Upper and Lower Extremities

167

the exception of the cutaneous innervation of the medial leg and foot
(supplied by the saphenous nerve). It also has numerous articular
branches to the hip and knee. The skin of the posterior thigh is
supplied by the posterior femoral cutaneous nerve (PFCN) and will be
variably spared (up to 35%) by subgluteal approaches to sciatic nerve
blockade. Indications for sciatic nerve block include foot and ankle
surgery, lower leg surgery, belowknee amputation, and analgesia
following knee surgery involving the posterior compartment. Given the
long course of the sciatic nerve through the posterior compartment, it
can be targeted at any point along its course. The most common
approaches are the subgluteal and popliteal. The subgluteal approach
targets the sciatic nerve as it traverses the subgluteal space between
the ischial tuberosity and the greater trochanter, taking advantage of
the reliable bony landmarks to aid identiﬁcation. This location is
amenable to catheter techniques, and reliable blockade can be achieved
with moderate volumes of local anesthetic. Its main drawbacks are that
several vascular structures are present in this space, including the
inferior gluteal vessels, and the aforementioned potential for sparing
the PFCN. The popliteal approach targets the sciatic nerve as it divides
into the CPN and the TN. At this level, the sciatic nerve lies more
superﬁcial and is superﬁcial to the popliteal vein and artery. These
vascular structures provide reliable anatomical landmarks to assist
identiﬁcation of the nerve. Care must be taken to ensure blocking
proximally to the division of the CPN and TN, such that both nerves can
be anesthetized within their common investing fascia. Local anesthetic
volumes of 10–20 mL are typically suﬃcient for adequate sciatic nerve
blockade (see Figure 11a.1).

Figure 11a.1 The sciatic nerve in the popliteal fossa. CPN, common
peroneal nerve.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

168

Peter Amato, Brittany Deiling, Erik Helander, et al.

iPACK The inﬁltration between the popliteal artery and the capsule of
the knee (iPACK) block was ﬁrst introduced in 2012 as a motor-sparing,
US-guided technique for providing analgesia to the posterior capsule of
the knee in patients undergoing TKA. Subsequently, indications have
spread to arthroscopic approaches to the knee, and it is commonly used
with a femoral or saphenous nerve block. The traditional sciatic nerve
block can provide excellent analgesia to the posterior knee; however, it
also results in motor blockade of the foot and ankle, which can delay
early rehabilitation and prevent recognition of a surgical injury to the
CPN. These features make a sciatic nerve block an undesirable option for
most patients undergoing knee surgery. The concept of the iPACK is to
provide posterior knee analgesia while preserving motor function of the
leg and foot by performing the block at the level of the sensory
articular branches innervating the posterior capsule of the knee.
Anatomically, these articular branches originate from the tibial, common
peroneal, and posterior division of the obturator nerve and traverse the
space between the popliteal artery and the distal femur to provide
sensation to the posterior knee. The iPACK block is typically performed
utilizing a high-frequency linear US transducer placed transversely in
the popliteal crease or medially over the distal thigh, to image the
distal femur/femoral condyles and the popliteal artery. Using an
in-plane technique, the block needle is then advanced in a medial to
lateral or anterior–medial to posterior–lateral direction, respectively,
through the space between the popliteal artery and the femoral condyles
until the needle tip is positioned approximately 2 cm past the popliteal
artery. A judicious dose of local anesthetic (15–20 mL) can be deposited
here to reliably block the nerves. Speciﬁc potential complications of
the iPACK block include needle injury to the CPN or TN and possible
motor blockade secondary to local anesthetic spread to the TN and CPN
within the popliteal space.

Lateral Femoral Cutaneous Nerve Block The lateral cutaneous nerve of the
thigh can be blocked individually or as part of a lumbar plexus
technique. This block has gained considerable popularity for
postoperative analgesia in hip surgery, meralgia paresthetica, and
muscle biopsy of the proximal lateral thigh. The anatomy of this nerve
is highly variable. It branches oﬀ the L2 and L3 dorsal divisions of the
lumbar plexus and courses on, or within, the iliacus muscle in the
pelvis between two fascial layers. It then runs 1– 2 cm medial to the
anterior superior iliac spine and can be found above, below, or inside
the inguinal ligament. Below the inguinal ligament, the nerve moves
laterally, and in the proximal thigh, it can be identiﬁed in

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Upper and Lower Extremities

169

the groove between the sartorius and the tensor fascia lata. Owing to
this variable course, landmark techniques are challenging and use of US
to localize the nerve is recommended. In performing the block, the
patient should be positioned supine. Using a high-frequency probe (10–15
Hz), the femoral nerve is identiﬁed in the inguinal skin crease. The
probe is slid laterally to identify the sartorius muscles and tensor
fascia lata. The LCFN can be recognized as a single hyperechoic oval. A
small dose of local anesthetic (approximately 5 mL) is suﬃcient for
blockade of the nerve.

Pericapsular Nerve Group Block The pericapsular nerve group (PENG) block
is a novel analgesic block for surgery or pathology of the hip. The PENG
block provides an alternative approach to treatment of hip pain that is
desirable for its simplicity to perform and its sensory-speciﬁc
qualities. More traditional nerve blocks for hip analgesia include the
FNBs fascia iliaca plane block and “3-in-1” FNB. Blocks around the
femoral nerve have been shown to improve pain following hip surgeries;
however, these patients are at signiﬁcantly higher risk of having motor
weakness and subsequently falls. This is especially relevant to the
outpatient setting where patients are not monitored and contend with
household hazards. The anterior portion of the hip capsule, which is the
most highly innervated portion of the joint, is supplied by three
nerves: the obturator nerve (posterior rami L2–4), the accessory
obturator nerve (L3–4), and the femoral nerve (anterior rami L2–4). The
PENG block was developed to selectively block the articular branches of
these three nerves. Indications for a PENG block include hip
arthroscopy, hip fractures, and anterior hip arthroplasty for analgesia
of the hip joint. Initially, this technique was used in a small case
series, with promising analgesic results, and demonstrated little motor
sequelae. Key landmark structures for this block are the anterior
inferior iliac spine (AIIS) and the iliopubic eminence (IPE) (see Figure
11a.2). The articular branches from the femoral nerve and the accessory
obturator nerve course between these two structures. The articular
branches of the obturator nerve are found close to the inferomedial
acetabulum. The common area for these nerves lies along the ilium deep
to the psoas, between the IPE and the AIIS. The PENG block is performed
with the patient in the supine position, using either a low-frequency
curvilinear probe or a linear US probe. The probe is positioned in the
inguinal crease and requires identiﬁcation of the AIIS and the IPE. The
local anesthetic is injected deep to the psoas tendon with an inplane
needle approach from lateral to medial. Successful performance of the
block is demonstrated by “peeling” of the psoas oﬀ the ilium with
instillation of the local anesthetic. A typical volume injected is 20 mL
of either 0.5%

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.012 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

11b

Regional Anesthesia: Chest and Abdominal Plane Blocks Jinlei Li,
Annemarie Senekal, Michael P. Webb, Alan David Kaye, and Erik Helander

Thoracic Plane Blocks Intercostal Nerve Block The intercostal nerves are
the continuations of the ventral ramus of the thoracic spinal nerves. To
perform an eﬀective ICB, the block should be performed proximal to the
mid-axillary line, where the lateral cutaneous branch takes oﬀ. ICBs can
be performed using landmarks, a nerve stimulator, or under ultrasound
guidance. Evidence supports the eﬀectiveness of ICBs for chest tube
placement, rib fractures, and procedures of the breast and chest wall.
Limitations of ICBs include the need to perform blocks at multiple
levels (each level of fractured rib) and their association with a
shorter duration of action, compared to other chest wall fascial plane
blocks such as pectoralis (PECS) II block and serratus anterior plane
block (SAP). This is mainly related to a high rate of absorption of
local anesthetic within the intercostal space. These considerations make
ICBs a less favorable option, as with each injection, there is a
potential risk of complications, such as neurovascular injury and
pneumothorax. The risk of local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) may
also be increased with multiple intercostal injections related to the
highly vascularized bundle located underneath each rib, resulting in a
high rate of absorption.

Pectoralis and Serratus Anterior Plane Blocks PECS and SAP blocks belong
to the group of newly developed chest wall fascial plane blocks. A PECS
I block refers to the injection of 10–20 mL of dilute local anesthetics
between the pectoralis major and the pectoralis minor muscles. This
interpectoral injection targets the medial (C8–T1) and lateral pectoral
nerves (C5–C7), which, respectively, originate from the medial and
lateral cords of the brachial plexus. The PECS II block consists of the
same interpectoral injection (PECS I), with an additional injection
between the pectoralis minor and the serratus anterior muscle (SAM). The
deeper subpectoral injection blocks the intercostal nerves, long
thoracic nerve, and thoracodorsal 173

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

174

Jinlei Li, Annemarie Senekal, Michael P. Webb, et al.

nerve. The PECS II injection is traditionally performed at the level of
the fourth rib on the anterior axillary line. Indications for PECS I and
II blocks include breast surgery such as lumpectomy, mastectomy, breast
expander insertion, and radical mastectomy with axillary lymph node
dissection. In addition, PECS II can also be used to provide analgesia
on the medial side of the arm for upper extremity procedures such as
elbow surgery or arterial– venous ﬁstula placement. At the axillary
fossa, the intercostobrachial nerve, lateral cutaneous branches of the
intercostal nerves (T3–T9), long thoracic nerve, and thoracodorsal nerve
are located in a compartment between the serratus anterior and the
latissimus dorsi muscles, and between the posterior and mid-axillary
lines. The SAP block is therefore performed at around the fourth to ﬁfth
rib, with local anesthetics injected either superﬁcial to the SAM (see
Figure 11b.1, right arrow) and deep to the latissimus dorsi muscle or
deep to the SAM and superﬁcial to the rib (see Figure 11b.1, left
arrow), though the former technique might be associated with more
eﬀective analgesia. Advantages of PECS blocks are that they can be used
as alternatives to classic postoperative pain control modalities in the
chest, such as thoracic epidural and thoracic paravertebral blocks
(TPVBs), by providing somatic

Figure 11b.1 Ultrasound-guided serratus anterior plane block. Arrow on
the right pointing at the injection site between the latissimus dorsi
muscle and the serratus anterior plane muscle, and arrow on the left
pointing at the injection site between the serratus anterior plane
muscle and the ﬁfth rib.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Chest and Abdominal Plane Blocks

175

pain control and with the potential for fewer complications such as
hypotension and urinary retention. The analgesic eﬀects of PECS and SAP
blocks are well supported by the literature, though it may be limited to
the anterior twothirds of the chest wall. These blocks can be done with
the patient supine and therefore can be performed in patients with
polytrauma and those on total spine precautions or in pelvic traction
who cannot be turned lateral or sat up, such as when needed for
placement of thoracic epidurals or paravertebrals. In addition, these
blocks are relatively superﬁcial in location and easy and safe to
perform under ultrasound guidance with a linear ultrasound transducer,
and have fewer stringent restrictions on the coagulation status.
Potential risks of PECS and SAP blocks include injury to the
thoracodorsal and long thoracic nerves, vascular injuries, LAST, and
pneumothorax. The novel chest wall blocks share similar analgesic
beneﬁts of thoracic epidural and TPVBs and can be used in unilateral or
bilateral surgery for upper thoracic procedures in the format of a
single injection or a continuous catheter.

Thoracic Paravertebral Block The TPVB is a truncal plane block with a
goal of analgesia/anesthesia of the left or right hemithorax. The
technique requires the deposition of local anesthesia in the
paravertebral space – immediately adjacent to the path of spinal nerves
emerging from the intervertebral foramina. The block can be performed
for surgical anesthesia but is most often relied upon as a source of
postsurgical or trauma analgesia. This block can be performed with a
variety of techniques, but ultrasound-guided techniques have led to a
resurgence of this block. The thoracic paravertebral space is an
anatomical wedge-shaped region that lies immediately adjacent to the
sides of the vertebral column. This space is bounded medially by the
intervertebral disc and the intervertebral neurovascular foramen, the
base by the body of the vertebrae, and anteriorly by the pleura. The
posterior wall is formed by the costotransverse ligament, a fenestrated
ligament complex that provides a window to access the space. The apex of
the space is formed by the lower border of the transverse process and
the conﬂuence of fascia from surrounding structures in the region. The
contents of the space are loose fatty connective tissue and the spinal
nerve, dorsal ramus, sympathetic chain, rami communicantes, and
intercostal vessels. TPVBs are most commonly performed under ultrasound
guidance with an in-plane approach. The ultrasonographic landmarking
relies primarily on the image acquisition of the transverse process of
the desired dermatomal level. A linear high-frequency probe (10–12 MHz)
is placed over the transverse process in the axial plane. An image of
the “squared-oﬀ” hyperechoic

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

176

Jinlei Li, Annemarie Senekal, Michael P. Webb, et al.

transverse process, costotransverse ligament complex, and moving pleura
is acquired. The target space lies deep to the ligament complex and
superﬁcial to the pleura. The needle is advanced adjacent to the
transverse process, through the ligament complex, and adjacent to the
pleura. Local anesthetic deposition in the paravertebral space results
in visible caudal and cephalad spread, and the anterior bulging of the
parietal pleura. The cephalad and caudal spread of local anesthesia
provides multilevel dermatomal spread.

Erector Spinae Plane Block The thoracic erector spinae plane block
(ESPB) is a relatively new truncal plane block that also provides
analgesia to the left or right hemithorax. In a fashion distinct from,
but not dissimilar to, the TPVB, this block anesthetizes the spinal
nerve roots as they traverse the interverterbral foramina. The exact
mechanism of this block is unclear and is likely to require ingress of
local anesthesia across the costotransverse ligament complex. It is an
ultrasoundguided technique that provides analgesia for procedures or
pain involving the hemithorax. The erector spinae muscle complex is
formed from a trio of long, vertical cephalocaudal muscles: the
spinalis, longissimus thoracis, and iliocostalis muscles. There is a
space deep to these muscles, and superﬁcial to the transverse process
and costotransverse ligament complex. It is believed that the eﬀect of
ESPBs is through the movement of local anesthetic from this plane into
the deeper paravertebral and epidural spaces, and laterally into the
intercostal spaces. The costotransverse ligament complex is fenestrated,
and thus may allow the spread of local anesthetic into these deeper
spaces, resulting in anesthesia of the sympathetic nerve roots, as well
as the dorsal and ventral rami. Diﬀusion laterally allows anesthesia of
the somatic (intercostal) nerve. However, spread of local anesthetic has
not been consistently seen in cavaderic studies, leaving some question
as to the exact mechanism of action. Similar to the TPVB, the ESPB is
performed most commonly with ultrasound guidance and an in-plane
approach. A linear high-frequency (10–12 MHz) ultrasound probe in the
axial plane is frequently used. The probe is placed over the transverse
process that corresponds to the desired level of blockade. The
transverse process image is acquired approximately 3 cm lateral to the
midline spinous processes, and is distinguished from the rounded ribs
and ﬂat, faint lines of the thoracic laminae (which are further lateral
and medial, respectively) by its “squared-oﬀ” appearance. Deep to these
structures is the hyperechoic and moving parietal pleura. A needle is
advanced in plane directly at the transverse process. The needle is
stopped just short of the transverse process (and many practitioners
will strike the transverse process before withdrawing slightly). Local
anesthesia deposition at this location results in an expansion of the
plane deep to the fascia, lifting

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Chest and Abdominal Plane Blocks

177

it oﬀ the transverse process and costotransverse ligament. Local
anesthesia is seen to spread cephalad and caudal from this deposition,
and much like the TPVB, spread in the plane is variable, resulting in a
variable dermatomal distribution.

Abdominal Plane Blocks Rectus Sheath Block The rectus sheath block is
useful for midline incisions from the xiphoid to the pubis. Unlike an
epidural, the rectus sheath block only aﬀects somatic pain (no visceral
coverage). A major beneﬁt of the rectus sheath block is access to the
posterior portion of the rectus abdominis. The innervation of the
anterolateral abdominal wall arises from the anterior rami of the spinal
nerves of T7–11, the subcostal nerve (T12), and the
iliohypogastric/ilioinguinal nerves (L1). The T7–11 nerves provide
sensory innervation to the rectus muscle and the overlying skin. In
obese patients, adipose tissue can sometimes be mistaken with the rectus
abdominis. Scanning medially and laterally from the midline can help
identify the tapering edges of the rectus abdominis on either side. The
amount of adipose tissue can inﬂuence the type of probe used, but
ideally the linear probe is used with a starting estimated depth of
around 3 cm. A practical place to begin is with the ultrasound probe
placed midline in a transverse orientation. A hyperechoic layer of
fascia can be identiﬁed deep to rectus abdominis muscle. Rectus sheath
blocks should be performed bilaterally and not all dermatomes may be
covered with a single injection. The needle can be advanced in plane
from lateral to medial, with the optimal injection point just superﬁcial
to the posterior fascia. Once the needle is in position, a total of
10–20 mL of local anesthetic is injected. Complications are uncommon but
can include inadvertent intraperitoneal injection, bowel perforation,
intravascular injection, and block failure.

Transversus Abdominis Plane Block The traditional transversus abdominis
plane (TAP) block provides analgesia to the abdominal wall beneath the
umbilicus (T10–12). It involves the injection of local anesthetic in
between the internal oblique and the transversus abdominis muscles. With
the use of ultrasound, the muscle layers are easily identiﬁable, which
has also cultivated new variations of the TAP block. Subcostal, lateral,
posterior, and ilioinguinal TAP blocks have been developed and provide
analgesia to slightly diﬀerent regions of the abdominal wall up to the
level of T6. Due to their safety, eﬃcacy, and ease, TAP blocks have
become a valuable part in multimodal analgesia. One advantage of TAP
blocks is that

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

178

Jinlei Li, Annemarie Senekal, Michael P. Webb, et al.

they can be performed after surgery while the patient is still
anesthetized or in the postanesthesia care unit. As previously
mentioned, the innervation of the anterior abdominal wall arises from
the anterior rami of spinal nerves T6–L1. The spinal nerves travel in
between the muscle layers of the abdominal wall, coursing anteriorly on
the superﬁcial part of the transversus abdominis muscle. The nerves that
travel on the superﬁcial surface of the transversus abdominis muscle
have lateral perforator branches, which are important for anesthetizing
the anterolateral part of the abdominal wall. There is marked individual
variation where these nerves enter and exit the transversus abdominis
plane, which can lead to incomplete analgesia from TAP blocks,
especially if they are performed too anteriorly. Thus, TAP blocks should
be performed as laterally as possible to increase the likelihood of
local anesthetic spread to these nerve branches before they exit the
fascial plane. When performing the TAP block, the patient can be in the
supine or lateral position and usually 20–30 mL of dilute local
anesthesia is prepared for each side to allow ample spread within the
fascial plane. A linear high-frequency probe (10–15 MHz) is ideal, but
in obese patients, a curvilinear low-frequency probe may be necessary.
The probe is ﬁrst positioned in a transverse plane, with the medial end
of the probe over the umbilicus, to obtain an image of the rectus
abdominis muscle. Next, the probe is slid laterally across the abdominal
wall, generally to the anterior axillary line halfway between the costal
margin and the iliac crest. As the probe is moved laterally, the typical
view of the three muscle layers will become visible. The internal
oblique is identiﬁable as the middle and thickest muscle layer, and the
transversus abdominis muscle will be visible deep to that. Ideally the
best site for injection is where all three muscle layers are present on
the lateral abdominal wall. Needle insertion is in plane from the
anteromedial side, traversing ﬁrst the adipose tissue and then both the
external and internal oblique muscles. The tip of the needle should be
placed in the superﬁcial part of the transversus abdominis muscle. To
improve spread within the TAP, the needle is advanced while injecting
the local anesthetic under direct vision and “unzipping” the fascial
layers. To optimize needle visibility, the needle insertion point should
be 3–5 cm away from the probe to provide for a more shallow approach
that is perpendicular to the line of the ultrasound beam. Complications
are infrequent but can occur, and include abdominal perforation, liver
hematoma, block failure, pneumothorax, hematoma, and local anesthetic
toxicity.

Quadratus Lumborum Blocks Quadratus lumborum blocks (QLBs) are
relatively new and emerging blocks, with limited, but growing, published
data regarding their eﬃcacy. There is interest in QLBs because they may
provide analgesia with motor-sparing eﬀects, while also avoiding the
potential complications of epidurals and

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Chest and Abdominal Plane Blocks

179

limitations of TAP blocks. Thus, this block may be eﬀective in assisting
in early mobilization in the postoperative period. The QLB is performed
under ultrasound guidance and has been described to be eﬀective in a
multitude of surgeries, including open abdominal surgery, laparoscopic
surgeries, and hip and femur surgeries. The quadratus lumborum (QL)
muscle resides in the lower back and forms part of the posterior wall of
the abdominal cavity. It originates from the iliac crest and inserts
onto the transverse processes of L1–4 and medial half of the twelfth
rib. Anteromedial to the QL is the psoas major muscle. Posteromedially
to the QL muscle lies the sacrospinalis muscle. Posterolaterally, the QL
lies next to the latissimus dorsi, and lateral to the QL are the major
muscles of the abdominal wall (external oblique, internal oblique, and
transversus abdominis). The thoracolumbar fascia (TLF) sheathes the
muscles of the lumbar and thoracic spine, and is formed by the
aponeurosis of the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles.
The TLF separates into three layers, with the posterior portion behind
the erector spinae muscle, the middle portion between the QL and erector
spinae muscles, and the anterior portion anterior to the QL. Three
diﬀerent QLBs have been described: lateral, posterior QL2, and anterior
QL3. These blocks can be performed with the patient in the supine or
lateral position; however, posterior and anterior QLBs may be better
performed with the patient in the lateral position. The mechanism of
analgesia for QLBs is still debated and one theory is it may be due to
spread of local anesthetic along the TLF and into the paravertebral
space. Furthermore, the mechanism of action may be diﬀerent for each
approach to the QLB. The lateral QLB can be considered as a posterior
TAP block whereby local anesthetic is deposited between the
anterolateral border of the QL muscles and the TLF adjacent to the three
muscles of the abdominal wall. This is generally used for surgeries
below the umbilicus and covers the L1 dermatome. The posterior QLB
involves injecting local anesthetic along the posterolateral border of
the QL and may block dermatomes from T4 to L1. The anterior QLB can be
the most challenging of the QLBs to perform and targets similar
dermatomes to the posterior QLB. This is also the most posterior
approach of the QLBs and involves injecting local anesthetic between the
QL and the psoas muscle. Lower extremity weakness can occur with QLBs
but has the greatest potential with the QL3 block. Potential
complications involve possible injury to intraabdominal organs,
including the liver, spleen, and kidney.

Review Questions 1. Which of the following is an ultrasound-guided
indication of appropriate deposition of local anesthetic in a thoracic
paravertebral block?

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

180

Jinlei Li, Annemarie Senekal, Michael P. Webb, et al.

(a) Aspiration of air prior to deposition
(b) Anterior bulging of the parietal pleura
(c) Local anesthetic spread deep to the erector spinae muscle complex
    and superﬁcial to the transverse process
(d) Rapid onset of a dense bilateral sensory block of both hemithoraces

<!-- -->

2.  When performing an erector spinae plane block, what is the
    characteristic appearance of the thoracic transverse processes?

<!-- -->

(a) Rounded appearance, 5 cm lateral to the midline
(b) Hypoechoic, “squared oﬀ”
(c) Hyperechoic, “squared oﬀ”
(d) Hyperechoic, moving with respiration

Answers 1 (b) The parietal pleura is anterior to the thoracic
paravertebral space and will be depressed anteriorly, with deposition of
local anesthetic causing it to bulge. 2 (c) The transverse processes of
the thoracic spine give a characteristic square appearance, relative to
the rib ends, which are rounded. Bone has a characteristic hyperechoic
appearance on ultrasound.

Further Reading Baldinelli F, Capozzoli G, Pedrazzoli R, Feil B,
Pipitone M, Zaraca F. Are thoracic wall blocks eﬃcient after
video-assisted thoracoscopy surgery-lobectomy pain? A comparison between
serratus anterior plane block and intercostal nerve block. J
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2021;35(8):2297–302. Carney J, Finnerty O,
Rauf J, Bergin D, Laﬀey JG, Mc Donnell JG. Studies on the spread of
local anesthetic solution in transversus abdominis plane blocks.
Anesthesia. 2011;66(11):1023–30. Forero M, Adhikary SD, Lopez H, Tsui C,
Chin KJ. The erector spinae plane block: a novel analgesic technique in
thoracic neuropathic pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2016;41(5):621–7.
Karmakar MK. Thoracic paravertebral block. Anesthesiology.
2001;95(3):771. Kaushal B, Chauhan S, Saini K, et al. Comparison of the
eﬃcacy of ultrasound-guided serratus anterior plane block, pectoral
nerves II block, and intercostal nerve block for the management of
postoperative thoracotomy pain after pediatric cardiac surgery. J
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2019;33(2):418–25. Kaye AD, Urman RD, Vadivelu
N. Essentials of Regional Anesthesia, 2nd ed. Cham: Springer;2018.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Regional Anesthesia: Chest and Abdominal Plane Blocks

181

Kim S, Bae CM, Do YW, Moon S, Baek SI, Lee DH. Serratus anterior plane
block and intercostal nerve block after thoracoscopic surgery. Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;69 (6):564–9. Kot P, Rodriguez P, Granell M, et
al. The erector spinae plane block: a narrative review. Korean J
Anesthesiol. 2019;72(3):209–20. Wang W, Song W, Yang C, et al.
Ultrasound-guided pectoral nerve block I and serratus-intercostal plane
block alleviate postoperative pain in patients undergoing modiﬁed
radical mastectomy. Pain Physician. 2019;22(4):E315–23. Yang H, Dong Q,
Liang L, et al. The comparison of ultrasound-guided thoracic
paravertebral blockade and internal intercostal nerve block for
non-intubated video-assisted thoracic surgery. J Thorac Dis.
2019;11(8):3476–81.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.013 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

12

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance Ryan J. Kline, John A. Helmstetter, and
Bethany L. Menard

Introduction Maintaining ﬂuid and electrolyte balance is one of the
mainstays of anesthesia. Often patients present to the operating room
with intravascular volume depletion secondary to nil per os (NPO)
status, acute bleeding, and recent bowel preparation, as well as with
electrolyte abnormalities due to coexisting disease. Physical
examination is useful in determining volume status, coupled with static
and dynamic hemodynamic monitoring.

Evaluation of Intravascular Volume Determining the intravascular volume
status can be diﬃcult for the clinician. However, it is very important
to be able to assess intravascular volume derangements in order to
improve perfusion to vital organs. Patient history is the ﬁrst step in
evaluating volume status by assessing the NPO status and for the
presence of persistent diarrhea and vomiting, intravenous ﬂuid
administration, recent blood administration, nasogastric suctioning, and
hemodialysis. Physical examination further assists in assessing the
volume status by assessing capillary reﬁll time, skin turgor, heart
rate, blood pressure, and intake and output and for the presence of
jugular distension, as well as the presence of peripheral edema.
Laboratory analysis can also provide some insight with serum lactate
levels, as well as arterial blood gases, both of which will assess
end-organ perfusion, which can be used as a surrogate for volume status.

Physical Examination and Laboratory Markers for Fluid Status Hypovolemic
patients may present with lethargy, hypotension, decreased skin turgor,
and reduced jugular venous pressure. Laboratory values also display
elevated blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels, hyperkalemia
or hypokalemia, hypernatremia or hyponatremia, and metabolic alkalosis
as well as acidosis. Hypovolemia is one of the most important volume
derangements and can lead to perioperative complications, including
acute kidney injury, acute cerebrovascular accidents, and decreased
global tissue perfusion. This loss of 182

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

183

intravascular volume may be due to “third spacing,” as well as loss of
sodiumcontaining ﬂuids through the skin, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, or
urine. The decreased intravascular volume can have many causes,
including excessive preoperative fasting, mechanical bowel preparation,
acute and chronic GI bleeding, sympathetic blockade secondary to
neuraxial anesthesia, and myocardial depression and vasodilatation
secondary to inhaled anesthetics. Hypervolemic patients may present with
elevated jugular venous pressure, edema of the lower extremities, S3
heart sound, and orthopnea. Laboratory ﬁndings include elevated B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP) levels, in
addition to radiographic ﬁndings of Kerlyy “B” lines due to increased
pulmonary vascular and interstitial markings.

Hemodynamic Measurements Static hemodynamic parameters that can be used
to monitor intravascular ﬂuid status include noninvasive blood pressure,
heart rate, urine output, mixed venous oxygen saturation, and central
venous pressure. These parameters are best used based on their trends to
determine volume status. These parameters have many limitations,
including in a hypovolemic patient unable to increase their heart rate
secondary to beta-blocker use, as well as surgical stress and anesthetic
gases leading to decreased urine output in a euvolemic patient. Dynamic
hemodynamic parameters are typically used as a guide for goaldirected
ﬂuid therapy, and compared to static parameters, they provide improved
assessment of ﬂuid challenge responsiveness. These parameters include
arterial pressure waveform variations (stroke volume variation, pulse
pressure variation, systolic blood pressure variation), transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE), and serum lactate levels, as well as noninvasive
devices (Vigileo FloTrac).

Intravenous Fluids The two types of intravenous ﬂuids include
crystalloids and colloids. Crystalloid solutions consist of ions in
water that are able to freely cross capillary membranes. Colloids
consist of high-molecular-weight substances that cannot cross capillary
membranes. Colloid solutions are beneﬁcial in maintaining plasma oncotic
pressure, whereas crystalloid solutions are able to equilibrate rapidly
with the extravascular ﬂuid space. There is no ideal resuscitation ﬂuid;
however, the choice of ﬂuid, as well as the dose, may aﬀect
patient-centered outcomes. Unfortunately, systematic reviews, as well as
randomized controlled trials, have not been able to prove increased
safety or eﬀectiveness of any one resuscitation ﬂuid or shown a decrease
in mortality.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

184

R. J. Kline, J. A. Helmstetter, and B. L. Menard

Crystalloids These solutions are widely available and low cost, and are
typically the ﬁrstline resuscitation ﬂuid for septic shock, hemorrhagic
shock, burn injury, cardiac arrest, and brain trauma. Isotonic
crystalloids can be separated into two types: balanced (lactated
Ringer’s, Plasma-Lyte) and saline (0.9% sodium chloride). Balanced
solutions have a composition that more closely resembles that of
extracellular ﬂuid. This is achieved by including buﬀers that are
excreted, as well as metabolized. They also contain sodium, chloride,
and possibly potassium, as well as have a more similar composition of
acids and bases to extracellular ﬂuid, as shown in Table 12.1. Normal
saline contains solely sodium and chloride, with a chloride
concentration of 154 mEq L−1 that is 50% more than is contained in
extracellular ﬂuid. This can lead to dilutional hyperchloremic acidosis
after large volume administration due to its increased sodium and
chloride content. As chloride concentration increases, a decrease in
plasma bicarbonate concentration is also observed. Balanced crystalloid
solutions include lactated Ringer’s, Plasma-Lyte, Normosol, and Isolyte.
These solutions also contain sodium and chloride, but also have varying
mixtures of added electrolytes (potassium, magnesium, and calcium) and
buﬀers (lactate and gluconate). The addition of these electrolytes and
buﬀers allows these ﬂuids to have a more similar acid–base composition
to extracellular ﬂuid. There is long-standing debate regarding the
eﬀectiveness of balanced crystalloids versus saline for ﬂuid
replacement. Recent studies have indicated that balanced crystalloids
can decrease the Table 12.1 Crystalloid solutions and their composition
Electrolyte

Plasma (mEq L−1)

ICF (mEq L−1)

ECF (mEq L−1)

Sodium

142

10

140

Potassium

4

150

4.5

Magnesium

2

40

2

Calcium

5

1

5

Chloride

103

103

117

Bicarbonate

25

7

28

ICF, intracellular ﬂuid; ECF, extracellular ﬂuid. Source: Table adapted
from Miller RD, Pardo MC. Basics of Anesthesia. Philadelphia, Elsevier,
2001. Rhoades RA, Tanner GA. Medical Physiology. Boston, Little, Brown,
1995.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

185

incidence of death, persistent renal dysfunction, and new renal
replacement therapy.

Colloids These solutions are higher cost and contain
higher-molecular-weight molecules in a carrier ﬂuid that are typically
unable to pass through the semipermeable capillary membrane. This allows
colloids to maintain and expand intravascular volume as they are less
able to leave the intravascular space and instead maintain colloid
oncotic pressure. This leads to a decreased volume required for
resuscitation, also known as the volume-sparing eﬀect. When
resuscitating with colloids versus crystalloids, three times the amount
of crystalloids are needed versus colloids to replace the lost
intravascular volume. The two main types of colloids include human
derived (albumin) and semisynthetic (starches). Albumin consists of
human protein removed from blood and added to saline. It is then heated
in order to decrease the risk of viral transmission. Administration
increases the intravascular oncotic pressure, which then leads to
movement of ﬂuid from the extravascular compartments into the
intravascular compartments. In severe sepsis and critically ill
patients, crystalloid solutions should be used for initial management,
with albumin infusions considered if solely crystalloids are ineﬀectual,
as per the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines. Semisynthetic colloids
include hydroxyethyl starch solutions and dextran solutions, as well as
others. These solutions are currently not in use in the United States
but have found use in Europe, and as a ﬁrst-line resuscitation ﬂuid in
military theaters. Current evidence is poor regarding clinical beneﬁt,
and risks of use include possible nephrotoxicity and changes in
coagulation.

Perioperative Fluid Replacement Preexisting ﬂuid deﬁcits, ﬂuid and blood
losses during surgery, and patient comorbidities can all increase the
complexity of proper ﬂuid replacement in the perioperative patient.
Historically, a more liberal approach to intravenous ﬂuid therapy was
employed in order to replace ﬂuid lost to “third spacing.” Loss of ﬂuid
into the third space leads to ﬂuid accumulation in the extravascular
extracellular space. More recently, consensus has shifted towards a more
goaldirected approach to ﬂuid replacement therapy due to patients
receiving excessive amounts of ﬂuids in the perioperative period. The
objective is to avoid underresuscitation, as well as overresuscitation,
in the perioperative period. This is important as underresuscitaiton can
lead to hypotension and impaired tissue oxygenation, as well as impaired
perfusion. Overresuscitation may lead to anastomotic compromise and
impaired GI function, as well as cardiac and

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

186

R. J. Kline, J. A. Helmstetter, and B. L. Menard

pulmonary complications. Ultimately, ﬂuid replacement should be based on
the individual patient, their comorbidities, and surgical
considerations.

Conventional Management This management style consisted of replacing
ﬂuid with crystalloid by using the maintenance ﬂuid rate multiplied by
the duration of NPO, with the addition of insensible losses (6 mL/(kg
hr) for small incisions), as well as replacement of three times the
amount of blood loss with crystalloid. The addition of maintenance ﬂuid
is also based on the 4–2–1 rule (4 mL kg−1 for the ﬁrst 10 kg body
weight, 2 mL kg−1 for the second 10 kg body weight, and 1 mL kg−1 for
the remaining body weight). This method of ﬂuid replacement can lead to
a large volume of ﬂuids administered in the perioperative period, and
has started to lose favor for more goal-directed ﬂuid management
strategies.

Goal-Directed Fluid Therapy This management style consists of
administering intravenous ﬂuid to achieve a speciﬁc target. These
targets include maintaining stroke volume, cardiac index, urine output,
blood pressure, and heart rate. This is achieved by delivering small
boluses of colloid (250 mL) in an eﬀort to maintain cardiac output or
stroke volume, rather than relying on a maintenance rate of ﬂuid
replacement. Use of goal-directed ﬂuid therapy in high-risk patient
populations and major surgeries was found to result in improved time to
recovery of GI function and decreased length of stay, as well as
decreased rates of pneumonia.

Perioperative Fluid Loss One of the diﬃcult tasks encountered during
surgery is estimation of surgical blood loss. This can be complicated by
hidden blood loss in the drapes, surgical ﬂush use, and occult bleeding
into the surgical wound. Visual estimation is used to determine the
amount of blood in the surgical suction canister, as well as assessing
the laparotomy pads and surgical sponges. Completely saturated
laparotomy pads can contain 100 mL of blood, and surgical sponges can
carry as much as 10 mL of blood. Other ﬂuid losses also occur during
surgical procedures. Based on the size of the incision, evaporative
losses can be calculated to further track ﬂuid loss. Small incisions,
such as hernia repairs, may lead to 0–2 mL kg−1 of volume loss per hour,
moderate incisions up to 2–4 mL/(kg hr), and large incisions, such as
open abdominal procedures, up to 4–8 mL/(kg hr).

Electrolyte Balance Management Table 12.2 shows the normal electrolyte
composition in body compartments.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

187

Table 12.2 Normal electrolyte composition in body compartments
Electrolyte

Plasma (mEq L−1)

ICF (mEq L−1)

ECF (mEq L−1)

Sodium

142

10

140

Potassium

4

150

4.5

Magnesium

2

40

2

Calcium

5

1

5

Chloride

103

103

117

Bicarbonate

25

7

28

ICF, intracellular ﬂuid; ECF, extracellular ﬂuid. Source: Table adapted
from Miller RD, Pardo MC. Basics of Anesthesia. Philadelphia, Elsevier,
2001. Rhoades RA, Tanner GA. Medical Physiology. Boston, Little, Brown,
1995.

Sodium Homeostasis Sodium homeostasis and plasma sodium concentration
are generally reﬂective of total body osmolality. Table 12.2 above
demonstrates the normal electrolyte composition in body compartments.
Total body osmolality is the sum of extracellular and intracellular
solutes divided by total body water. Plasma osmolality is regulated by
thirst and secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) from the posterior
pituitary. When an increase in extracellular osmolality is sensed by
cells in the hypothalamus, ADH is released and increases water
reabsorption in the kidney to restore normal plasma osmolality. Normal
plasma osmolality is typically in the range of 280–290 mOsm L−1. On the
other hand, when the extracellular ﬂuid has a decreased osmolality, ADH
secretion is reduced; the kidneys excrete more water, and plasma
osmolality shifts back to normal. Thirst sensors in the hypothalamus
also sense increases or decreases in extracellular ﬂuid osmolality and
stimulate or suppress thirst. One must evaluate plasma osmolality when
assessing a patient with sodium level derangements.

Hyponatremia Hyponatremia is deﬁned as sodium concentration &lt;135 mEq
L−1 and occurs either due to an increase in total body water or through
the body’s excess sodium loss relative to water loss. Hyponatremia
causes are often determined by evaluation of plasma osmolality. In a
hyponatremic patient with a normal plasma osmolality, causes include
marked hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia which are asymptomatic. It can
also be due to glycine absorption during transurethral surgery that
presents with symptoms. In those with an elevated

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

188

R. J. Kline, J. A. Helmstetter, and B. L. Menard

plasma osmolality, causes of hyponatremia are attributed to either
mannitol administration or hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia causes what is
known as pseudohyponatremia. Calculations can be made to determine the
actual sodium level in the presence of severely elevated plasma glucose
levels. Patients with both low sodium and low plasma osmolality are
categorized as having decreased, normal, or increased total sodium
content. In those with a decreased total sodium content, sodium losses
can be renal or extrarenal. Renal losses are most commonly attributed to
thiazide diuretics but can also be due to salt-losing nephropathies,
mineralocorticoid deﬁciency, or renal tubular acidosis. Extrarenal
sodium losses are the result of excessive diarrhea or vomiting,
sweating, burns, or “third spacing.” In patients with a normal total
sodium content, causes include primary polydipsia, syndrome of
inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH), hypothyroidism, drug-induced, and
glucocorticoid deﬁciency. Finally, in those with an increased total
sodium content and hyponatremia, causes typically include congestive
heart failure, cirrhosis of the liver, and nephrotic syndromes. Symptoms
and manifestations of hyponatremia are due to an increase in
intracellular water. With this eﬀect, symptoms are typically
neurological and nonspeciﬁc. Some symptoms include malaise, weakness,
and anorexia; however, they can progress to life-threatening situations
such as seizures or coma and leading up to death. Serious symptoms
typically occur when sodium levels are &lt;120 mEq L−1. Chronicity of
sodium level derangements also factors into the severity of
symptomatology. Those with chronic hyponatremia typically have mild
symptoms or none at all. When correcting for hyponatremia, one must ﬁrst
aim to identify the underlying cause of the metabolic derangement. This
is often done through plasma and urine osmolality measurements, along
with evaluation of the patient’s volume status. Urine sodium levels are
measured to evaluate whether sodium losses are extrarenal or renal in
nature. The treatment of choice of hyponatremic patients with a
decreased total body sodium content is typically isotonic saline. By
contrast, in patients with normal or increased total body sodium
content, treatment for hyponatremia is water restriction. Evaluation of
a patient’s underlying cause of hyponatremia is particularly important
because treatment may be more speciﬁc to their disease process such as
hormone replacement in a patient with, for example, a glucocorticoid or
thyroid hormone deﬁciency. Since acute hyponatremia presents with the
most serious of symptoms, it is generally recommended to treat patients
to a sodium level of &gt;120 mEq L−1. Correction of sodium levels must
be performed ﬁrst by calculating the patient’s total sodium deﬁcit by
use of the following formula: sodium deﬁcit = total body water ×
(desired sodium − current sodium). Once this calculation has been
determined, the sodium level should not be rapidly corrected due to the
possibility of causing central pontine myelinolysis and permanent
neurological damage. Acute

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

189

hyponatremia, typically described as &lt;48 hours, often presents with
seizures and/or coma and must be addressed urgently. Several published
cases suggest a correction of 4–6 mEq L−1 should be suﬃcient to suppress
seizures secondary to hyponatremia. Fluid boluses of 3% saline are
typically used to treat acute hyponatremia. One method for correcting
sodium levels is to use an approximation formula of 1 mL kg−1 of 3%
sodium chloride, which is expected to raise serum sodium levels by 1 mEq
L−1. One must always remember to address the underlying cause to
evaluate if it is reversible. It is also recommended to monitor serum
sodium levels approximately every 6–8 hours during correction periods.
Typically, sodium levels of &gt;130 are acceptable for a patient who
will undergo general anesthesia. Those with symptoms should have the
sodium levels corrected prior to anesthetic administration, especially
those undergoing transurethral procedures and at risk of massive ﬂuid
absorption.

Hypernatremia Hypernatremia occurs when there is an increase in sodium
solutes in comparison to total body water. Hypernatremia is deﬁned as
sodium levels &gt;145 mEq L−1. It occurs either due to a relative loss
of water more than sodium loss or as a result of sodium retention. Those
in a hypernatremic state may have normal, low, or high total body sodium
content. Patients with hypernatremia and low total body sodium content
have lost sodium and water, but the water loss is greater than the
relative sodium loss. This is often the result of osmotic diuresis,
sweating, or diarrhea, and patients often appear hypovolemic on
presentation. By contrast, hypernatremia, in the presence of normal
total body sodium content, often is the result of central or nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus. Lastly, patients with high total body sodium content
and hypernatremia are often seen following infusions of hypertonic
saline. Other instances of hypernatremia can be seen in patients with
Cushing’s syndrome or primary aldosteronism. Manifestations of
hypernatremia occur as a result of cellular dehydration. Chronic
hypernatremia is typically better tolerated. Symptoms can range from
hyperreﬂexia to lethargy. More acute developments of hypernatremia can
lead to decreases in brain volume that can ultimately cause shearing of
the cerebral veins and subsequent brain hemorrhage. Other common
manifestations of acute hypernatremia include seizures, coma,
neurological damage, and even death. To manage hypernatremia, one must
ﬁrst identify if the issue is acute or chronic, and what the underlying
cause is. One must calculate the patient’s total body water deﬁcit and
aim to correct that deﬁcit in a 48-hour span with a hypotonic solution,
such as 5% dextrose in water. Patients with a low total body sodium
content should ﬁrst be treated with an isotonic solution prior to

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

190

R. J. Kline, J. A. Helmstetter, and B. L. Menard

hypotonic solution treatment. If a hypernatremic patient has a high
total body sodium content, they should also be given a loop diuretic to
enhance sodium loss, along with hypotonic solution administration. The
most important issue with hypernatremia correction is the rate at which
it is corrected. One should not correct hypernatremia at a rate faster
than 0.5 mEq/(L hr) in order to avoid cerebral edema and the risk of
permanent neurological damage. Addressing hypernatremia is extremely
important in the perioperative period because it has been shown in many
studies to be an independent predictor of increased risk of 30-day
morbidity and mortality. Increased rates of major coronary events,
pneumonia, wound or surgical site infections, and venous thromboembolism
are seen in patients with hypernatremia in the perioperative period. In
many instances, patients with hypernatremia present for emergent surgery
and correction of sodium levels prior to surgery may not be feasible.

Potassium Homeostasis Potassium homeostasis is an important regulator
and a determining factor in the resting cell membrane potential. As seen
in the normal electrolyte range displayed in Table 12.2, the
intracellular level of potassium is much higher (approximately 140 mEq
L−1) compared to the extracellular level (approximately 4 mEq L−1).
Maintenance of this gradient is important for normal cellular functions.
Derangements can occur due to lower or higher total body potassium
levels, along with redistribution between extracellular and
intracellular components without an actual change in total body
potassium levels. Shifts of potassium ions between intracellular and
extracellular compartments occur with acid/base shifts and plasma pH
alterations, catecholamine activity, insulin administration or
circulation, and changes in plasma osmolality. Acidosis promotes the
intracellular shift of hydrogen ions into the cell, with concomitant
shift of potassium ions into the extracellular compartment, and hence an
increase in plasma potassium levels. The opposite eﬀect is seen with an
alkalotic state, with an end-result of low plasma potassium levels.

Hypokalemia Hypokalemia is deﬁned when plasma potassium levels fall
below 3.5 mEq L−1. Hypokalemia can be attributed to any situation that
leads to either a decreased potassium intake or excessive potassium
losses, or shifts between the intracellular and extracellular
compartments. Signs or manifestations of hypokalemia are broad and can
signiﬁcantly aﬀect a patient undergoing anesthesia in the perioperative
period. One of the most serious eﬀects is on the cardiovascular system,
which is a result of cell membrane excitability. Hypokalemia can
manifest as ECG changes, which can include ST segment depression,
decreased T wave amplitude, and the presence of a U wave. Arrhythmias
are also seen, with premature

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

191

ventricular contractions (PVCs) being the most common; however,
premature atrial contractions (PACs) are also seen in this state.
Neuromuscular symptoms can also be manifested in the presence of
hypokalemia. Muscle fatigue and restlessness, myalgias, and weakness can
be seen in mild cases. When potassium levels are critically low, such as
&lt;2 mEq L−1, extremity paralysis may occur and even potentially
involve muscles of the trunk and muscles involved in respiratory
mechanics. Other body systems can be aﬀected by hypokalemia. In the
renal system, polyuria, increased ammonia production, and increased
bicarbonate reabsorption can occur. Hypokalemia can lead to decreased
insulin and aldosterone secretion in the endocrine system. Patients with
liver disease can develop encephalopathy and hypokalemia can also lead
to an overall decreased nitrogen balance. When addressing hypokalemia in
the perioperative period, one must take into consideration the rate at
which it is developing and what the underlying cause may be. Mild
hypokalemia in the range of 3.0–3.5 mEq L−1 in the absence of ECG
changes often is not associated with an increased anesthetic risk;
however, more critically low potassium levels must be addressed to
mitigate the above-mentioned risks. When potassium repletion is
necessary, one should assess the necessary amount of potassium that must
be administered to reach a safe threshold. Potassium supplementation
should be done under close ECG monitoring. If more rapid potassium
replacement is deemed necessary, it should be done via a central venous
catheter. Intravenous ﬂuids should not contain dextrose, as the risk of
hyperglycemia could worsen hypokalemia. When intravenous potassium
replacement is used, it is recommended this does not exceed 240 mEq per
day. Another important anesthetic consideration in the setting of
hypokalemia is the use of neuromuscular blocking drugs. There is
increased sensitivity to these drugs in a hypokalemic patient;
therefore, a provider should consider a reduction in the dose, along
with close neuromonitoring with a nerve stimulator.

Hyperkalemia Hyperkalemia is deﬁned as serum potassium levels of &gt;5.5
mEq L−1. The diﬀerential diagnosis for hyperkalemia is extensive and can
be multifactorial. The diﬀerential list can be broken down into a few
categories, including pseudohyperkalemia, redistribution or
extracellular movement of potassium, decreased renal excretion of
potassium, and increased potassium uptake. Pseudohyperkalemia can be the
result of using a tourniquet and/or a smallbore needle for blood
collection. It can also be seen in the presence of marked thrombocytosis
or leukocytosis. Because potassium is predominantly intracellular,
potassium shifting out of the cell can obviously lead to an increase in
plasma potassium levels. A number of medications can cause extracellular
movement of potassium, including, but not limited to, beta-2 blockers,

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

192

R. J. Kline, J. A. Helmstetter, and B. L. Menard

digoxin, and succinylcholine. It is predicted that succinylcholine
causes approximately 0.5 mEq increase in the potassium level; however,
this can be much higher in cases such as burns and massive tissue
trauma. Insulin deﬁciency can cause hyperkalemia. Other causes of
hyperkalemia due to redistribution include rhabdomyolysis and hemolysis
due to any cause, as well as metabolic acidosis. Impaired renal
excretion is another large category of patients with hyperkalemia, with
the most obvious causes being renal failure and impaired glomerular
ﬁltration rates. Decreased mineralocorticoid activity can lead to
hyperkalemia. Medications are also a very common cause of hyperkalemia.
Some medications include potassium-sparing diuretics such as
spironolactone and amiloride, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors, nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), trimethoprim,
and pentamide. Increased potassium intake is unlikely to cause a problem
in normal individuals, unless inadvertent large doses are given or if
repletion is given too rapidly. One must remember that potassium levels
can be increased when multiple blood transfusions are administered.
After 21 days of storage, one unit of whole blood can potentially
contain up to 30 mEq L−1 of potassium. Hyperkalemia manifests with signs
and symptoms mainly through eﬀects on cardiac and skeletal muscle.
Cardiac signs of hyperkalemia can be seen on ECG changes initially with
peaked T waves and shortened QT interval, but can progress to widening
of the QRS complex, PR interval prolongation, loss of the P wave, and ST
segment depression. These changes can ultimately lead to a sine wave
pattern before the most feared transition to ventricular ﬁbrillation or
even asystole. Hyperkalemia can be worsened in the presence of acidosis,
hyponatremia, and hypocalcemia. Skeletal muscle manifestations are not
usually present until potassium levels exceed 8 mEq L−1, resulting in
muscle weakness. Because cardiac and skeletal muscle manifestations of
hyperkalemia can lead to severe morbidity and mortality, potassium
levels &gt;6 mEq L−1 must be treated. Treatment of hyperkalemia is aimed
at stabilizing the cardiac muscle cell membrane, shifting potassium into
the intracellular space, and eliminating potassium from the body.
Stabilizing the cardiac membrane is done through administration of
intravenous calcium gluconate or calcium chloride. If a patient has
metabolic acidosis, one should administer sodium bicarbonate to promote
the intracellular movement of potassium. Other methods to shift the
potassium intracellularly include inhaled beta agonists and intravenous
insulin and glucose. To excrete potassium from the body in a patient
with improved renal function, furosemide can be administered, with an
onset of 5– 15 minutes. A much slower method of excretion is through
administration of sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate); however,
this can have an onset time of 2–24 hours. Finally, in cases of very
severe or refractory hyperkalemia, dialysis can be done to remove
potassium. Hemodialysis can remove

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

193

approximately 50 mEq hr−1, and peritoneal dialysis can remove about 10–
15 mEq hr−1. As mentioned earlier, because of the lethal nature of this
electrolyte abnormality, an anesthesia provider must be extremely
careful in not proceeding with elective cases in the setting of
signiﬁcant hyperkalemia. Many institutions have their own “cutoﬀs” for
potassium levels before proceeding with surgery. Often for elective
surgery, a potassium level of &gt;6.5 signiﬁes a deﬁnitive cancellation
and necessitates treatment. There are no speciﬁc levels or guidelines
for other potassium levels; however, one must evaluate the acuity of not
only the electrolyte imbalance, but also the patient’s underlying
disease process and situation, as well as the urgency of the surgery.

Calcium Homeostasis Calcium homeostasis is particularly important
because calcium ions participate in nearly every biological function and
disruption in its balance can lead to profound eﬀects on nearly all body
systems. Over 98% of the body’s calcium is in bone. Calcium is normally
absorbed through the GI system and is mostly excreted by the kidneys.
Disorders along any of this passage, as well as many other factors, can
lead to hypocalcemia or hypercalcemia. Calcium exists in the body as
either a free ionized form (50%) or bound to a protein (40%). Albumin is
the major calcium-binding protein; therefore, alterations in albumin
levels will alter total calcium levels. The remaining 10% of calcium is
bound to other anions such as amino acids or citrate. Alterations in
plasma pH can aﬀect protein binding and hence alter ionized calcium
levels. In other words, a decrease in plasma pH will decrease protein
binding and lead to higher levels of the free ionized calcium. Normal
calcium homeostasis is maintained by three main substances – parathyroid
hormone (PTH), vitamin D, and calcitonin. PTH is the most important
regulator of plasma calcium levels. Decreased levels of calcium lead to
secretion of PTH, which, in turn, mobilizes calcium from bone and
enhances its absorption in the renal tubules. PTH also indirectly
increases intestinal absorption of calcium. Vitamin D augments calcium
absorption in the intestines and also helps facilitate the actions of
PTH. Calcitonin is a hormone released by the thyroid gland when calcium
levels are elevated. Calcitonin lowers calcium levels through increased
urinary excretion and inhibition of bone resorption.

Hypocalcemia Hypocalcemia is conﬁrmed by total calcium levels. It must
be corrected for in the presence of hypoalbuminemia. Other causes of
hypocalcemia include hypoparathyroidism or pseudohypoparathyroidism.
Vitamin D deﬁciency is a major cause of hypocalcemia and can be seen in
a number of conditions such as malnutrition,

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

194

R. J. Kline, J. A. Helmstetter, and B. L. Menard

malabsorption either secondary to postsurgical changes or inﬂammatory
bowel disease, and altered vitamin D metabolism. Hyperphosphatemia,
pancreatitis, rhabdomyolysis, fat embolism, and loop diuretics are other
potential etiologies of low calcium levels. One must recall that stored
blood products contain citrate as preservative. Following multiple
transfusions, citrate can chelate calcium and lead to a decrease in
calcium levels. A similar eﬀect can also be seen after large albumin
boluses. Hypocalcemia can manifest with paresthesias, weakness, and
muscle spasms in the carpopedal area and masseter known as the
Trousseau’s sign and Chvostek’s sign, respectively. Seizures can also be
seen in profound hypocalcemia. Important considerations for anesthesia
include the risk of laryngospasm and bronchospasm. Cardiac
manifestations are commonly seen as ECG changes and decreased cardiac
contractility leading to hypotension or heart failure. The QT interval
is prolonged and ST inversions can occur; however, it can also be normal
in the setting of life-threatening hypocalcemia. Signiﬁcant hypocalcemia
should be addressed and treated prior to someone being anesthetized.
Hypocalcemia that is severe enough to cause symptoms should be promptly
treated with intravenous calcium gluconate or chloride. Serial calcium
levels should be checked regularly during the replacement period. Other
anesthetic considerations of hypocalcemia include avoidance of
alkalosis, as this can worsen hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia can lead to
unpredictable responses of neuromuscular blocking drugs, as well as
potentiate the negative inotropic eﬀects of volatile anesthetics.

Hypercalcemia The most common cause of hypercalcemia is primary
hyperparathyroidism. An increase in PTH secretion leads to increased
blood calcium levels. Another common cause of increased calcium levels
is malignancy. Bone metastasis can lead to bone destruction or secretion
of mediators of hypercalcemia such as PTH-like substances,
prostaglandins, and cytokines. Increased bone turnover in diseases such
as Paget’s disease can lead to increased calcium levels. Other causes
include granulomatous disorders such as tuberculosis and sarcoidosis,
chronic immobilization, milk-alkali syndrome, adrenal insuﬃciency, and
drug-induced with medications such as thiazide diuretics and lithium.
Clinical signs and symptoms of hypercalcemia include nausea and
vomiting, anorexia, weakness, and polyuria. Lethargy and confusion can
lead to coma. As with most other electrolyte abnormalities, ECG changes
can be seen. With hypercalcemia, the QT interval is shortened, as well
as the ST segment. When hypercalcemia is symptomatic, it must be
treated. Treatment includes ﬁrst addressing the underlying cause of
hypercalcemia. Initial therapies to lower calcium levels include normal
saline administration, often at a rate of 2.5–3.0 mL/(kg hr). This is
particularly important in the surgical patient and

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

195

saline diuresis should be continued in the intraoperative period.
Bisphosphonates, such as pamidronate, are the ﬁrst-line drug of
treatment in hypercalcemia. Other treatment modalities include
administration of phosphate intravenous infusion or intravenous doses of
calcitonin. Anesthesia providers in the perioperative period should
monitor calcium levels serially, along with other electrolytes such as
potassium and magnesium. During the perioperative period, in a patient
with acidosis, one should consider controlled ventilation to avoid
acidosis that could worsen hypercalcemia.

Magnesium Homeostasis Magnesium balance plays an important role in many
enzymatic pathways in the body, often serving as a cofactor. Majority of
magnesium is located within the bone with only approximately 1–2%
present in the extracellular compartment. Derangements of magnesium
levels can have several anesthetic implications. Magnesium also serves
as a therapy for some conditions and disease processes. Magnesium is
absorbed in the small bowel and is excreted renally, where it can also
be reabsorbed. Normal magnesium levels in the blood are between 1.7 and
2.1 mEq L−1.

Hypomagnesemia Hypomagnesemia is deﬁned as plasma levels of &lt;1.7 mEq
L−1. A number of diﬀerent factors can lead to this condition. Decreased
nutritional intake is a potential cause, along with malabsorption in the
GI tract. Decreased absorption can be seen in syndromes of
malabsorption, laxative use, prolonged nasogastric suctioning, or severe
diarrhea or vomiting. Another potential etiology of hypomagnesemia is
increased renal loss that can be seen with diuretic use,
hyperaldosteronism, nephrotoxic drug use, hypophosphatemia, and diabetic
ketoacidosis. Hypomagnesemia is commonly seen in chronic alcoholics,
patients with pancreatitis, hyperthyroid patients, and burn victims. As
with nearly all other electrolyte abnormalities, low magnesium levels
can present with ECG changes and cardiac muscle cell irritability. The
most common changes seen are PR and QT interval prolongation. It is also
associated with an increased risk of atrial ﬁbrillation. Hypomagnesemia
is commonly asymptomatic but can present with weakness, paresthesias,
ataxia, confusion, and even seizures. Hypomagnesemia is often seen in
patients with concomitant hypokalemia and hypocalcemia; therefore, it is
often imperative to address these abnormalities in the perioperative
period. Treatment can be given either orally or intramuscularly;
however; more serious presentations, such as seizures, should warrant
intravenous treatment, which is often given in doses of 1–2 g over a 15-
to 60-minute period. Since hypomagnesemia is associated with a risk of
arrhythmias, anesthesia providers should treat low levels of magnesium
and monitor ECG waveforms closely.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

196

R. J. Kline, J. A. Helmstetter, and B. L. Menard

Hypermagnesemia Elevated levels of magnesium are most commonly seen
following exogenous administration; however, impaired renal excretion
can also lead to elevated levels. Intravenous magnesium is sometimes
used in the treatment of preeclampsia and eclampsia, and can lead to
elevations in both mother and fetus. Magnesium functions in the body as
a calcium blocker; therefore, one can expect hemodynamic compromise with
critically high levels of magnesium. If a patient also has hyperkalemia,
there is an increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias and cardiac arrest.
Neuromuscular symptoms occur as a result of magnesium inhibiting
acetylcholine release from the neuromuscular junction. The kidneys are
typically able to maintain magnesium homeostasis until the glomerular
ﬁltration rate drops below 30 mL min−1. Hypermagnesemia often does not
show signs or symptoms until magnesium levels reach &gt;4 mg dL−1. Some
milder symptoms include weakness, nausea, dizziness, and confusion. As
magnesium levels reach between 7 and 12 mg dL−1, diminished deep tendon
reﬂexes (DTRs) can be seen. This physical examination ﬁnding is often
assessed for in preeclamptic patients receiving magnesium therapy. At
these magnesium levels, patients can often experience worsening
confusion, ﬂushing, headaches, blurred vision, bladder paralysis, and/or
constipation. Hypotension and bradycardia may also be apparent with
these magnesium levels. As magnesium levels increase to &gt;12 mg dL−1,
ﬂaccid paralysis, decreased respiratory drive, and more pronounced
hypotension and bradycardia can be seen. ECG changes often demonstrate a
prolonged PR interval or atrioventricular blocks. With magnesium levels
of &gt;15 mg dL−1, coma and cardiorespiratory arrest are often the
unfortunate presentation. Hypermagnesemia is an important consideration
for the anesthesia provider. Because of the associated risk of cardiac
instability and hemodynamic compromise, magnesium levels should be
addressed prior to elective surgery. ECG waveforms should always be
closely monitored in those receiving magnesium therapy, as well as in
those with known elevated plasma levels of magnesium. Elevated levels of
magnesium can inhibit acetylcholine release from the neuromuscular
junction; thus, neuromuscular blocking drugs should be used with extreme
caution, as these patients may have exaggerated responses. Close
monitoring with a nerve stimulator is necessary and one should consider
dosage reductions. Volatile and intravenous anesthetics may have a more
pronounced negative inotropic eﬀect in a patient with elevated magnesium
levels. It has been suggested that magnesium can decrease overall
anesthesia requirements and blunt cardiovascular eﬀects from
laryngoscopy and intubation, along with its muscle relaxation eﬀect.
Although magnesium can be used in a multitude of conditions, such as
asthma, torsades de pointes, and preeclampsia and eclampsia in
pregnancy, exogenous magnesium administration or inadvertent overdose
can lead to serious consequences. In severe

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Fluid and Electrolyte Balance

197

cases of elevated magnesium levels, intravenous calcium gluconate or
calcium chloride should be administered to antagonize the eﬀect of
magnesium at the neuromuscular junction or in cardiac muscle. Normal
saline administration is also recommended as a treatment modality in
severe cases. If increased renal excretion is warranted, loop diuretics,
such as furosemide, can be given. If kidney function is profoundly
impaired and magnesium levels are critical or symptomatic, hemodialysis
can be performed to eﬀectively remove magnesium from the blood; however,
this can also increase excretion of calcium and, in turn, worsen the
symptoms of hypermagnesemia. If patients have severe respiratory or
cardiopulmonary complications, ventilation and vasopressor
administration may be warranted to stabilize the patient while treatment
can ensue. Providers should always closely monitor ECG waveforms, along
with serial measurements of plasma magnesium, as well as calcium,
levels.

Review Questions 1. Goal-directed ﬂuid therapy has been found to have
improved outcomes, except which of the following? (a) Decreased rates of
pneumonia (b) Decreased length of stay (c) Increased patient
satisfaction (d) Improved time to recovery of gastrointestinal function
2. Which of the following medications does not cause hyperkalemia? (a)
Furosemide (b) Spironolactone (c) Trimethoprim (d)
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors

Answers 1 (c) Goal-directed ﬂuid therapy has been found to decrease
rates of pneumonia, decrease length of stay, and improve time to
recovery of gastrointestinal function. 2 (a) Spironolactone,
trimethoprim, and ACE inhibitors can cause hyperkalemia. Other
medications include amiloride, nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs, and
pentamidine. Furosemide is one medication that can cause hypokalemia due
to increased potassium loss in the kidneys.

Further Reading Aguilera IM, Vaughan RS. Calcium and the anaesthetist.
Anaesthesia. 2000;55:779–90. DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2044.2000.01540.x.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.014 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

13

Blood Transfusion Components and Complications in Anesthesiology
Christine T. Vo and Pamela R. Roberts

Packed Red Blood Cells Processing, Storage, and ABO Compatibility
Donation of one unit of whole blood or apheresis can be used to obtain
red blood cell (RBC) units. For apheresis RBCs, a donor is connected to
an apheresis machine and RBCs are separated from other constituents,
which are returned to the donor; this process may yield 2 units of RBCs
or a single unit of RBCs, along with a unit of platelets and/or plasma.
RBC units are stored in polyvinyl chloride bags with the plasticizer
di-2-ethylhexylphthalate (DEHP) to maintain RBC membrane integrity
during storage. Preservation includes an anticoagulant-preservative
(A-P) solution, and the current additive solutions maintain pH and other
parameters needed to allow RBC storage shelf life of 42 days \[1\]. ABO
typing and matching are required to avoid reactions due to mismatch (see
Table 13.1).

Components One unit of RBCs has approximately 2–5 billion leukocytes,
which convey risks of adverse reactions, including transmission of
cytomegalovirus (CMV), intracellular organisms, and inﬂammatory or
immunologically mediated reactions. Leukocyte reduction or depletion is
the process of blood ﬁltration to remove leukocytes. Leukoreduction done
prestorage is preferred over depletion as it removes more leukocytes,
has better quality control, and is a standardized process. Universal
leukoreduction strategies decrease the leukocyte load by about 99.9%.
Beneﬁts of leukoreduction include reducing the incidence of febrile
nonhemolytic transfusion reactions, transfusion-related acute lung
injury (TRALI), and transmission of CMV and prions \[2\].

Clinical Application Informed consent should be obtained prior to
transfusion, except in emergencies. In the United States, average
storage of RBCs is 15–19 days; numerous 200

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Blood Transfusion Components and Complications in Anesthesiology

201

Table 13.1 ABO and rhesus compatibility of the various blood components
Recipient blood type

Donor RBCs

Donor platelets

Donor FFP

Donor cryoprecipitate

Rh compatibility

Indicated

Indicated

Not indicated

Not indicated

O

O

O, AB, A, B

O, A, B, AB

O, A, B, AB

A, AB

A, AB

B, AB

B, AB

AB

AB

A B AB

A, O B, O AB, A, B, O

a

a

a

a

A, AB, B, O B, AB, A, O a

a

a

AB, A, B, O

a Consider other donors if known from apheresis process and resuspended
in additive solutions. RBC, red blood cell; FFP, fresh frozen plasma;
Rh, rhesus.

randomized clinical trials demonstrated similar outcomes with fresh,
standard issue, or long storage duration RBCs. RBC units require storage
at 1–6°C to prevent bacterial growth and preserve viability. During any
transport, RBCs must be kept between 1 and 10°C.

Indications for Transfusion Symptomatic anemia and acute blood loss are
indications for transfusion of RBCs. Physiologic triggers include
orthostatic hypotension, shock with marginal hemoglobin levels, and
evidence of end-organ damage due to inadequate tissue oxygenation.
Clinical concerns of risks of transfusions led to studies revealing
noninferiority of restrictive transfusion strategies aimed at hemoglobin
levels of 7–8 g dL−1. Single-unit transfusions with reassessment prior
to further transfusion and treatment of iron deﬁciency with iron are
both recommended by the Choosing Wisely Campaign, which is promoted by
clinical groups from over 20 countries on ﬁve continents \[3\].
Recommendations for most hospitalized patients include a restrictive
threshold of 7–8 g dL−1, and for patients with preexisting
cardiovascular disease, data support a threshold of 8 g dL−1. Current
recommendations are to assess for symptoms, as well as hemoglobin level,
prior to deciding to transfuse. Anesthesia-related studies, such as a
meta-analysis by Chong et al. \[4\], also support restrictive strategies
in critically ill and surgical patients with improved outcomes,
including reduced risk of stroke, transfusion reactions, hospital length
of stay, and signiﬁcantly reduced 30-day mortality in critically ill
patients. Further studies are necessary to determine speciﬁc goals for
perioperative stages and for varied surgical populations.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

202

Christine T. Vo and Pamela R. Roberts

Potential Complications Transfusion reactions are covered later in this
chapter. Mistransfusion, iron overload, alloimmunization, and metabolic
derangements can also occur. Some of these complications can be
decreased by avoiding unnecessary transfusions or using electronic
systems to ensure patient identiﬁcation and blood matching for each
patient.

Fresh Frozen Plasma Processing, Storage, and ABO Compatibility Plasma is
centrifuged out from citrate-containing whole blood or apheresis
donations. Plasma rises to the top. It is then collected and frozen to
−18°C within 8 hours of collection. It should be noted that there are
instances where collected plasma is frozen &gt;8 hours, but &lt;24
hours, from collection. This is termed PF24 for plasma frozen within 24
hours. The clinical diﬀerence is negligible, but there is a decrease in
factor VIII and protein C levels during the thawing process \[5\]. FFP
can be stored frozen for up to 1 year. ABO compatibility must be
followed.

Components FFP contains factors II, V, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XI. It also
contains ﬁbrinogen (400–900 mg per unit), albumin, protein C, protein S,
antithrombin, tissue factor pathway inhibitor, and von Willebrand factor
(vWF) \[6\].

Clinical Application Once thawed, FFP must be used within 5 days for
major hemorrhagic cases; otherwise it is recommended to transfuse FFP
within 24 hours of thawing \[7\]. One unit of FFP is contained in
approximately 250 mL of solution. Usual dose of 15–20 mL kg−1 is enough
to raise clotting factors by approximately 20–30%. In general, raising
clotting factors by 10% is enough for clinically signiﬁcant hemostasis
\[8\].

Indications for Transfusion Plasma is mainly used to correct for
clotting factor deﬁciencies in actively bleeding patients, especially
when speciﬁc clotting factor concentrates are not readily available.
Patients with signiﬁcant liver disease have deﬁciencies in multiple
clotting factors. When they are actively bleeding or there is concern
for clinically signiﬁcant bleeding with upcoming invasive procedures,
and the international normalized ratio (INR) is &gt;1.5, transfusion of
FFP is generally

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Blood Transfusion Components and Complications in Anesthesiology

203

indicated. Other acquired deﬁciencies in clotting factors are expected
in patients taking vitamin K antagonists, those with acute disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC), and those undergoing massive
transfusion protocol. The signiﬁcance of active bleeding weighed against
the unavailability of speciﬁc clotting factor concentrates would make
FFP a reasonable option for transfusion. FFP has also been indicated
with thrombotic microangiopathies as a replacement ﬂuid \[9\].

Potential Complications FFP has been implicated in TRALI at a rate of
approximately 1 in 2000 plasma transfusions, although the incidence may
be higher due to limitations in passive reporting of adverse events. It
is the second leading cause of transfusion-associated mortality in the
United States, with FFP being the most common cause for this
complication \[10\]. Caution should be taken to avoid FFP in patients
with a congenital deﬁciency in immunoglobulin A in the presence of
anti-IgA antibodies. These patients can develop severe anaphylactic
reactions. FFP from IgA-deﬁcient donors are advised for this speciﬁc
patient population. Less than 1% may develop signiﬁcant anaphylactic
allergic or febrile reactions. Approximately 1% may have mild allergic
reactions manifested as urticaria. Other complications include
transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO), transmission of
viral infections, hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR), and citrate
toxicity \[9\].

Platelets Processing, Storage, and ABO Compatibility Platelets are
obtained either from whole blood or through an apheresis donation. The
clinical eﬃcacy is similar, with the only diﬀerence being that the
recipient of the transfusion is exposed to more donors with platelets
obtained from whole blood \[9\]. The platelets are then stored at room
temperature of approximately 22°C, with continuous agitation, for no
more than 5 days. ABO compatibility is not required, but recommended if
derived from whole blood. Rhesus (Rh) compatibility is necessary.

Components In general, platelets obtained from whole blood produces
approximately 0.45–0.85 × 1011 platelets. Therefore, multiple units are
pooled together to produce a platelet concentrate of about 2.5 × 1011,
whereas platelets obtained from an apheresis donation produces a
concentrate of about 3 × 1011.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

204

Christine T. Vo and Pamela R. Roberts

Clinical Application One unit of pooled platelets from whole blood or
one unit of platelets from apheresis will raise the platelet count by
approximately 30,000–50,000 per microliter in an average adult. Once
processed, platelets should be transfused within 4 hours of release.

Indications for Transfusion Platelet transfusion is used for
prophylactic and therapeutic treatment of signiﬁcant bleeding in
patients with severe thrombocytopenia or disorders of dysfunctional
platelets \[9\]. For anesthesiologists, the suggested threshold for
transfusion varies, but the general recommendation is to transfuse to a
platelet count of above 50,000 per microliter for invasive procedures or
major surgery. For surgeries where even microbleeds are devastating,
such as ocular surgery or neurosurgery, it is recommended to transfuse
to a platelet count of above 100,000 per microliter. During massive
transfusions, it is recommended to transfuse to a threshold of 75,000
per microliter. Speciﬁc perioperative situations where platelet
transfusions would be indicated include acute DIC with signiﬁcant
hemorrhage, disorders of platelet function with active bleeding, or
during massive transfusions with active bleeding.

Potential Complications Sepsis is a concern due to the storage of
platelets at room temperature favoring an environment for bacterial
growth. Therefore, the risk of bacterial infection is higher than viral
transmission, with a rate of contamination of about 1 in 2000
transfusions. Mild allergic reactions can occur, as well as febrile
nonhemolytic reactions, TRALI, TACO, alloimmunization to human leukocyte
antigens (HLA) and human platelet antigens (HPAs), and posttransfusion
purpura. Transfusion of platelets should be avoided in patients with
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
due to the risk of worsening thrombosis.

Cryoprecipitate Processing, Storage, and ABO Compatibility When FFP is
thawed to 1–6°C, cryoprecipitate precipitates out from the solution.
These cryoproteins are then suspended in a small volume of plasma and
refrozen. It can be stored at −18°C for up to 1 year. To preserve the
integrity of clotting factors, it takes approximately 20–30 minutes to
thaw cryoprecipitate. ABO compatibility must be followed. Rh
compatibility is not required.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Blood Transfusion Components and Complications in Anesthesiology

205

Components Cryoprecipitate contains ﬁbrinogen, factors VIII and XIII,
vWF, and ﬁbronectin. The average ﬁbrinogen content is 300 mg per unit.
The average factor VIII content is 120 IU per unit, with the shortest
half-life of 12 hours. The average factor XIII content is 60 IU per
unit. The average vWF content is 125 IU per unit. Most facilities will
pool multiple units together when distributing for transfusion \[11\].

Clinical Application Cryoprecitipate must be transfused within 4–6 hours
of thawing. Cryoprecipitate is typically given as 5–10 pooled units. For
correcting ﬁbrinogen deﬁcits, one unit of cryoprecipitate generally
raises the plasma ﬁbrinogen concentration by about 7–10 mg dL−1 in an
average 70-kg adult. The target ﬁbrinogen level is above 100 mg dL−1;
thus 10 units of cryoprecipitate should be adequate to reach this
target. It should be noted that there are insuﬃcient data to recommend
an optimal dose \[7\].

Indications for Transfusion Cryoprecipitate is mainly used for
clinically signiﬁcant bleeding in patients with hematologic disorders
consisting of deﬁciencies in clotting factors speciﬁc to components
found in cryoprecipitate. These include patients with von Willebrand
disease, DIC, liver disease, uremia with signiﬁcant bleeding, and with
low or dysfunctional ﬁbrinogen. Cryoprecipitate is considered an
alternative if ﬁrst-line therapy is not available. Standard of care
involves the use of speciﬁc recombinant or plasma-derived factor
concentrates.

Potential Complications There is a risk of viral transmission that is
similar to packed RBC (PRBC) transfusion, but with the added eﬀect of
exposure to multiple donors due to pooled units typically being infused.
Other risks are similar to that of FFP, but lower overall due to smaller
total volumes of plasma transfused. These include TRALI, TACO, HTR,
allergic reaction, and citrate toxicity.

Complications Any suspected transfusion reaction should be reported to
the local blood bank. With reactions being a rare event, their expertise
is a valuable resource to help guide management, as well as provide
details for further workup necessary to appropriately diagnose
complications from a transfusion. Reporting is important to prevent
future reactions to the patient, as well as for quality control
measures. Table 13.2 summarizes and compares key elements of
complications commonly associated with blood product transfusions.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Blood Transfusion Components and Complications in Anesthesiology

209

Transfusion-Associated Circulatory Overload TACO has been associated
with the most common cause of death from transfusion since 2016 \[13\].
Aside from preexisting cardiac, pulmonary, and/or renal disease, the
risk of developing TACO increases proportionally to the number of units
transfused. It is important to avoid unnecessary and excessive
transfusions.

Signs and Symptoms Cardiopulmonary distress is a cardinal feature of
TACO. This includes tachypnea, dyspnea, decreased oxygen saturations,
tachycardia, and hypertension. Pulmonary edema will be present. At least
three of the following criteria should be met to consider TACO as the
etiology of respiratory compromise: acute or worsening respiratory
status; acute or worsening pulmonary edema; signs of congestive heart
failure not explained by preexisting cardiac history; signs of ﬂuid
overload; and/or increased B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or
N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP) levels \[14\].

Treatment Cessation of any ongoing transfusions should be immediately
done for suspected TACO reactions. The focus should be on supportive
care and balancing the overloaded ﬂuid status. Patients will typically
respond to diuretic therapy, with rapid improvement in their clinical
status. Oxygen supplementation is indicated for patients with
saturations &lt;90%. Consideration for ventilatory support should be
made for signiﬁcant respiratory deterioration. This may include
noninvasive positive pressure techniques versus endotracheal intubation.
Since TACO is the result of a ﬂuid-overloaded state, resumption of
transfusion may be considered once the patient has reached a stable
hemodynamic state.

Further Workup Immediate referral to the blood bank/hospital transfusion
medicine service is highly recommended for consultation on how to
proceed with future transfusions and workup, as well as helping in
distinguishing between TACO and TRALI. It is also crucial to notify
these services to prevent future reactions on the aﬀected patient.
Ordering CXR, BNP or NT-proBNP, echocardiography, and following ﬂuid
balance, arterial blood gases (ABGs), and pulse oximetry may help guide
diagnosis and responsiveness to therapy.

Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury This complication of transfusion
is deﬁned as a new acute lung injury (ALI)/acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) with hypoxemia (i.e., room air oxygen saturation of ≤90%
or PaO2/FiO2 ratio of &lt;300 mmHg) and bilateral inﬁltrates on

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

210

Christine T. Vo and Pamela R. Roberts

CXR occurring during or within 6 hours of blood product administration.
If a temporally related alternative etiology or risk factor of ALI/ARDS,
such as aspiration, toxic inhalation, sepsis, pneumonia, trauma, burn
injury, or pancreatitis, coincided, then the term “possible TRALI” is
commonly used. TRALI is a clinical diagnosis which does not require
detection of antibodies \[15\]. The true incidence of TRALI is unclear
but is thought to range between 1 in 5000 and 12,000, and is believed to
vary among patient populations, with a higher incidence in critically
ill patients than in general populations \[16\]. Recent TRALI mitigation
strategies for platelet and plasma components appear to have contributed
to decreases in its incidence. Prior to 2016, TRALI was the leading
cause of transfusion-related mortality, but TACO has overtaken this.
TRALI occurs in any patient, all age groups, and both sexes equally.
Recipient risk factors vary in published studies but commonly include:
shock prior to transfusion, chronic alcohol abuse, smoking, positive
ﬂuid balance prior to transfusion, sepsis, mechanical ventilation, and
liver disease or transplantation. All blood components have been
implicated in TRALI. The most prominent blood component risk factors are
high plasma volume components which include plasma, apheresis platelet
concentrates, and whole blood, as well as female gender and increased
parity of the donor. Currently, the majority of TRALI cases occur after
RBC transfusions and age of storage does not seem related to incidence.
The risk of TRALI is likely mediated by incompatibility to donor HLA/HNA
antibodies, instead of proportionally to the number of units transfused.
To decrease TRALI, many countries use a strategy of supplying
transfusable plasma products exclusively from male donors, female donors
without a prior pregnancy, or donors who test negative for HLA
antibodies. TRALI pathogenesis is proposed to be mediated by neutrophil
sequestration and priming followed by neutrophil activation; further
mechanistic details are beyond the scope of this chapter.

Signs and Symptoms Symptoms of hypoxemic respiratory insuﬃciency often
begin within 1–2 hours of beginning the transfusion but may be delayed
as long as 6 hours. Pulmonary inﬁltrates with a classically normal
cardiac silhouette are seen on CXR. If the patient is intubated, pink,
frothy secretions may be seen. Other symptoms may include fever,
hypotension, tachypnea, tachycardia, and cyanosis.

Treatment If TRALI is suspected during a transfusion, it should be
discontinued immediately. Clinical treatment of TRALI is supportive,
with oxygen supplementation being the fundamental intervention.
Noninvasive respiratory therapies, such as high-ﬂow oxygen, continuous
airway positive pressure (CPAP), or bilevel positive airway pressure
(BIPAP), may be suﬃcient, but endotracheal intubation and mechanical
ventilation may be necessary. ARDS treatment strategies should be

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Blood Transfusion Components and Complications in Anesthesiology

211

used for these patients. Hemodynamic support should be aimed at ensuring
end-organ perfusion and may require volume administration and/or
vasoactive therapy. Early diuresis should be avoided as it may
exacerbate hypotension. Diﬀerentiating TRALI from TACO or, in some
patients, determining a coexistence of a combination of these entities
is needed prior to considering diuretic therapy. As in other causes of
ARDS, routine use of steroids is not recommended. An extensive review of
perioperative transfusion-related lung injuries relevant to
anesthesiologists is provided by McVey and colleagues \[17\].

Further Workup Immediate referral to the blood bank/hospital transfusion
medicine service will lead to a transfusion reaction workup with
appropriate laboratory blood tests for the recipient. The blood bank
will assemble a list of all products administered in the previous 6
hours and alert the supplier, who will recall donors and initiate HLA,
and possibly HLN, antibody testing. Results of this testing will not
change treatment of the patient but may lead to declining further
donation from a donor.

Febrile Reactions The presence of fever without other systemic
complications leads one to consider a febrile nonhemolytic reaction.
This is considered after other etiologies for fever have been ruled out.
It is thought that this reaction occurs due to the release of donor
cytokines from white blood cells of a blood product that had not been
leukoreduced. These include interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-8, and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα). Although febrile nonhemolytic reactions
may occur with any blood product, it is more commonly associated with
platelet or RBC transfusions. It is one of the most common types of
transfusion reactions, occurring at a rate of 0.1–1% of all transfusions
\[18\].

Signs and Symptoms These include fever (deﬁned as temperature rising
1–2°C above the baseline) within 1–6 hours of transfusion and
potentially chills and rigors. This is a diagnosis of exclusion after
ruling out other etiologies for fever, including sepsis, TRALI, and HTR.

Treatment The transfusion should be terminated immediately. Inpatient
admission should be considered for workup of more serious complications
of fever. Once ruled out, treatment involves primarily supportive care.
Antipyretics may be useful for treatment of fever, but evidence for
routine prophylactic use is limited and has not conclusively shown
beneﬁt in reducing the incidence of a febrile reaction. Meperidine may
be administered for signiﬁcant chills with associated shivering.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

212

Christine T. Vo and Pamela R. Roberts

Further Workup The transfusion medicine service should be notiﬁed for
reaction workup. No further workup for febrile nonhemolytic reaction is
necessary as this is a benign self-limiting reaction, although workup
for severe life-threatening complications should be initiated.

Hemolytic Transfusion Reaction HTRs can range from clinically
insigniﬁcant hemolysis to life-threatening accelerated destruction of
RBCs causing massive hemolysis, acute renal failure, DIC, and
potentially death \[19\]. HTRs most commonly occur with transfusion of
ABO-incompatible RBCs where recipient native antibodies form complexes
with donor cellular antigens, leading to complement activation and
extravascular and/or intravascular hemolysis. Rarely do HTRs occur with
other blood products, but they may contain antibodies that react with
recipient RBCs \[20\]. Acute-onset HTRs typically involve IgM-mediated
antibody–antigen complexes that result in complement activation and
subsequent hemolysis. Bradykinin and histamine release leads to their
corresponding signs and symptoms. Kidd, Kell, Duﬀy, and Rh RBC antigens
have been implicated in patients with a history of transfusion and
alloimmunization, more often causing delayed HTRs that occur about 3–30
days after transfusion. Delayed HTRs typically occur when the recipient
has IgG alloantibodies to speciﬁc antigens (from prior exposure to
allogeneic blood such as from a prior blood transfusion, pregnancy, or
sharing intravenous needles) that are present in donor blood products
and result in a clinically insigniﬁcant extravascular hemolytic
response.

Signs and Symptoms Acute HTRs are associated with fever, chills, back
pain, hypotension, urticaria, bronchospasm, dyspnea, ﬂushing, and
anxiety that occur within minutes of transfusion of ABO-incompatible
blood products. Under general anesthesia, these signs may not be
apparent until signiﬁcant hemolysis has occurred. Signs of DIC or
hemoglobinuria may be seen under general anesthesia. Delayed HTRs
generally result in mild fever, hyperbilirubinemia, and sometimes
anemia.

Treatment Acute HTRs are a medical emergency. Immediate termination of
the transfusion and notifying the blood bank are critical. Hemodynamic
support with vasoactive agents and intravenous hydration with 0.9%
sodium chloride should not be delayed for further laboratory workup.
Goals are to maintain hemodynamic stability and adequate urine output to
prevent further renal injury.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Blood Transfusion Components and Complications in Anesthesiology

213

Further Workup Lab draws should be obtained from a diﬀerent site from
where the transfusion took place, ideally on a diﬀerent extremity;
otherwise a separate site on the same extremity will suﬃce. For acute
HTRs, lab work should include the following: ABO compatibility, direct
and indirect Coombs’ tests, urine sample, free hemoglobin level,
haptoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase, bilirubin, DIC workup, electrolytes
(for hyperkalemia), and serial hemoglobin levels (for anemia) \[20\].
HTRs are isolated incidences, but the patient should be made aware to
notify their provider/blood bank about the HTR for any future
transfusions, so that proper crossmatching can occur. Laboratory workup
for delayed HTRs should include general testing for hemolysis, as well
as an antibody screen to identify the triggering RBC antigen.

Allergic Reactions These reactions may range from mild urticaria and
pruritus to signiﬁcant lifethreatening anaphylactic reactions. These
reactions can occur with any blood component. Seemingly mild allergic
reactions can quickly escalate to a signiﬁcant anaphylactic reaction, as
the early signs and symptoms may be similar for all allergic reactions.
Anaphylactic reactions are usually IgE- or IgG-mediated immune responses
with acute severe systemic release of histamine and tryptase by mast
cell and basophil degranulation. The most common allergic reactions
occur in patients with an IgA deﬁciency who have circulating IgG
anti-IgA antibodies that respond to donor IgA antigens.

Signs and Symptoms It may manifest as mild urticaria and pruritus that
are a mere annoyance to signiﬁcant dyspnea, wheezing, angioedema, and
hypotension. Urticaria can occur at any point of the transfusion,
whereas anaphylactic reactions generally manifest within minutes of
transfusion initiation.

Treatment The transfusion should be terminated immediately, and the
blood bank notiﬁed. If an anaphylactic reaction is suspected, low-dose
epinephrine should be administered (0.3 mg IM of a 1 mg mL−1 solution or
50–100 μg IV), conﬁrming the diagnosis of anaphylaxis based on the
immediate response to epinephrine. IV ﬂuid resuscitation for hypotension
and an epinephrine infusion may be necessary for hypotensive patients
refractory to initial epinephrine administration. Oxygen and
bronchodilators and/or maintenance of a patent airway may be indicated
if clinically signiﬁcant respiratory distress occurs from bronchospasm
or angioedema, respectively. If a mild urticarial reaction is suspected,
after terminating the transfusion and ﬁnding no evidence for an evolving
anaphylactic reaction, the patient can be given 25–50 mg

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

214

Christine T. Vo and Pamela R. Roberts

diphenhydramine PO or IV to assess for the resolution of hives. If there
is improvement, with no signs of hemodynamic deterioration, the
transfusion may be resumed.

Further Workup Notifying the blood bank will help prevent further
anaphylactic reactions by ensuring future IgA-deﬁcient blood products
are released for the patient; tryptase levels may be helpful to conﬁrm a
true anaphylactic reaction. Workup to rule out other transfusion
reactions, such as TRALI, TACO, and sepsis, should be investigated since
clinical manifestation can be similar with hypotension and dyspnea.

Sepsis Bacterial contamination represents a signiﬁcant source for
transfusion-related fatalities. The source of contamination can occur at
any point, from the donor’s skin during the initial venepuncture to the
water bath used to thaw blood products. Many organisms are reported as
causative of transfusion-transmitted bacterial infections, including
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Escherichia coli,
Klebsiella, Enterobacter, and Pseudomonas. Platelets are associated with
the highest risk of bacterial contamination secondary to their storage
in warmer conditions. The incidence and magnitude of bacterial
contamination increase with the duration of storage, with &gt;4 days
being associated with an almost sixfold increase in bacterial
contamination \[21\]. It is standard practice to divert the initial
20–40 mL of donor blood into a separate chamber to minimize the risk of
contaminating the entire donation \[19\].

Signs and Symptoms Sepsis is associated with fever or an increase of
&gt;2°C from baseline, tachycardia, change in systolic blood pressure of
&gt;30 mmHg, chills, and rigors. Onset of signs and symptoms varies from
within 30 minutes to 5 hours of transfusion. Gram-negative organisms are
associated with a more severe presentation, a quicker onset, and a
higher mortality risk \[21\].

Treatment The transfusion should be terminated immediately, and the
blood bank and microbiology laboratory notiﬁed. Supportive care should
be initiated, with treatment aimed at potential septic shock. This may
include ﬂuid resuscitation and ventilatory and vasopressor support.
Septic shock may lead to multiorgan dysfunction, with an elevated risk
of death. If there is a high suspicion for sepsis, treatment with
broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initiated, with the intention to
tailor to more speciﬁc antibiotic therapy or discontinuation of
antibiotics after results of blood cultures are obtained.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.015 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

14

Cardiac Anesthesiology Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, Julia
Kendrick, and Matthew Graves

Introduction The anesthetic management of patients undergoing cardiac
surgery involves meticulous preparation and persistent vigilance. In
this chapter, we will discuss the general anesthetic principles that
apply to all cardiac surgical procedures in the preoperative,
intraoperative, and early postoperative phases. By doing so, we aim to
provide a standard approach and rationale for monitoring and managing
complex cardiac surgical patients. We will then conclude by highlighting
anesthetic considerations that are unique to speciﬁc types of cardiac
procedures.

Preoperative Evaluation Patients requiring cardiac surgery should
undergo a thorough preoperative evaluation. The results of this
assessment impact preoperative optimization, intraoperative anesthetic
management, and postoperative planning. Recommended preoperative tests
and objectives are provided in Table 14.1 \[1\]. A sample of a standard
cardiac anesthesia setup is listed in Table 14.2. Maintaining adequate
tissue oxygen delivery and hemostasis for patients undergoing cardiac
surgery can be challenging. Adequate blood products should be prepared,
as transfusion of blood products is often necessary, though the
associated risks may complicate the decision to transfuse. The
Transfusion Requirements in Cardiac Surgery III trial concluded a
restrictive transfusion threshold of 7.5 g dL−1 had noninferior outcomes
to a more liberal transfusion threshold and can be used to guide the
administration of red blood cells \[2\]. Other factors indicating
inadequate oxygen delivery, such as low mixed venous oxygen saturation
and lactic acidosis, may also support the decision to either transfuse
or hemoconcentrate blood to raise the hemoglobin level and
oxygen-carrying capacity. The use of plasma, platelets, cryoprecipitate,
or other factors should be guided by laboratory testing and clinical
bleeding. For patients who refuse blood transfusions, a thorough
discussion identifying acceptable alternative strategies in the
preoperative period is essential. These alternatives may include the
preoperative use of erythropoietin, iron, and vitamin B12 and folate
supplementation, as well as intraoperative acute normovolemic
hemodilution, cell salvage, and recombinant 217

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

218

Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, et al.

Table 14.1 Recommended tests before cardiac surgery Test

Objective

Complete blood count

To detect anemia, thrombocytopenia, and infection

Basic metabolic panel

To detect renal disease, electrolyte abnormalities, and poor glycemic
control

Hemoglobin A1c

To diagnose and determine the severity of diabetes mellitus

Liver function tests

To detect unknown liver disease

Coagulation proﬁle

To detect unknown coagulation disorders

Pulmonary function tests

To aid in diﬀerentiating between restrictive and obstructive pathology,
and in ventilator weaning

Brain natriuretic peptide

When elevated, there is increased risk of atrial arrhythmias and
prolonged postoperative stay

Thyroid function tests

To detect thyroid dysfunction

Blood type and crossmatch

To allow for rapid blood preparation and transfusion, if needed

Echocardiography

To detect undiagnosed pathology that may determine hemodynamic goals,
selection of appropriate monitors, and need for circulatory support

Cardiac catheterization

To evaluate coronary disease, patency of previous grafts, gather
information about coronary anatomy and potential targets for grafting,
and conﬁrm chamber pressure and severity of pulmonary hypertension

Carotid Dopplera

To detect carotid stenosis and determine perioperative stroke risk

Chest radiograph

To evaluate lung ﬁelds, detect aortic calciﬁcation and pleural eﬀusions,
and help identify sternal wires that are a sign of prior sternotomy and
implanted medical devices

a

Recommended in patients with a history of transient ischaemic attack or
stroke or patients &gt;65 years old with carotid bruits or peripheral
vascular disease.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

219

Table 14.2 Cardiac anesthesia setup Standard items:

• Airway equipment necessary to facilitate masking and endotracheal
intubation • Induction medications, emergency resuscitative medications,
heparin, and protamine

• Rack of pumps, with infusions on a carrier • Infusions (either
available in the room or “on pump”) may include vasopressors,
vasodilators, inotropes, propofol, antibiotics, insulin,
antiﬁbrinolytics, etc.

• Equipment to place arterial and venous lines, including triple
transducer setup and ultrasound machine

• Transesophageal echocardiography machine and probe, lubrication, bite
block, and patient’s information programmed

• Cooler with blood products, checked • Miscellaneous: pacer box,
patient sticker with barcode, deﬁbrillator pads, and machine Items to
consider in special circumstances:

• • • • •

Pulmonary artery catheter, continuous cardiac output monitor Lung
isolation equipment Inhaled pulmonary vasodilator device Cerebral
oximetry Bags of ice

clotting factors \[3\]. Of note, normovolemic hemodilution is
contraindicated in severe aortic stenosis, left main coronary artery
disease, and preoperative hemoglobin concentration &lt;11 g dL−1.
Contraindications to using cell salvage include infection, malignancy,
and use of topical hemostatic agents. Of note, platelets and coagulation
factors are removed during the washing process, promoting dilutional
thrombocytopenia and reduction in clotting factors. Additionally,
attempts should be made to prevent ﬁbrinolysis through the use of either
tranexamic acid or aminocaproic acid. Patients undergoing repeat cardiac
surgery have adhesive scar encasement of cardiovascular structures and
are at risk of sudden massive hemorrhage with repeat sternotomy and
mediastinal dissection. CT of the chest should be performed to ascertain
the retrosternal position of these structures \[4\]. In high-risk
patients, it may be necessary to preemptively expose the femoral vessels
or even establish peripheral cardiopulmonary bypass prior to sternotomy.
Additional units of blood should be readily available and external
deﬁbrillator pads should be considered also for these cases. Any
implanted cardiac electronic device should be evaluated prior to cardiac
surgery. Important variables to assess include the type of device (e.g.,

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

220

Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, et al.

Table 14.3 Recommendations for holding medications prior to cardiac
surgery Medication

Recommendation

Adenosine diphosphate inhibitors

Stop at least 5 days prior to surgery

Coumadin

Stop 3–5 days prior to surgery

Direct thrombin inhibitor

Stop 2–4 days prior to surgery

Direct factor Xa inhibitor

Stop 2 days prior to surgery

Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors

Do not take on the day of surgery

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors

Do not take on the day of surgery

Angiotensin receptor blockers

Do not take on the day of surgery

single- or dual-lead pacemaker, biventricular resynchronization
pacemaker, implantable cardiac deﬁbrillator), pacemaker dependency,
device functionality, and the patient’s underlying rhythm. Pacemakers
usually require reprogramming to pace in asynchronous mode, with any
tachytherapies disabled to avoid device activation or inhibition by
electrical artifacts. In particular, the use of surgical electrocautery
in close proximity to the device leads to extensive electromagnetic
interference. Patients with disabled tachytherapies should always have
external deﬁbrillator pads in place. Chronically taken cardiac-speciﬁc
medications that should be continued throughout the perioperative period
include statins, aspirin, and beta-blockers. Those that may need to be
held prior to cardiac surgery are listed in Table 14.3. Additional
medications to consider in the preoperative setting include a
benzodiazepine for anxiolysis and fentanyl for analgesia during
preinduction arterial catheter placement. Benzodiazepines and fentanyl
should be used judiciously, however, to avoid excessive sedation,
hypoventilation, hypercarbia, hypoxemia, and increased pulmonary
arterial pressure. This is especially concerning in patients with
preexisting pulmonary hypertension and/or right ventricular dysfunction.

Intraoperative Management Monitoring In addition to standard American
Society of Anesthesiologists monitors, patients receiving cardiac
surgery also require monitoring of continuous ﬁve-lead ECG with
automated ST-segment analysis, processed EEG to minimize the risk of
intraoperative awareness, nerve stimulation of motor activity to ensure

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

221

immobility, arterial and central venous pressure monitoring to detect
sudden changes in hemodynamics, both nasal and bladder temperature
monitoring to trend changes induced by cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB),
urinary output for assessing end-organ perfusion, and possibly also
pulmonary artery pressure, mixed venous oxygen saturation, and cerebral
oximetry. Prevailing evidence does not support routine pulmonary artery
catheterization. Reasons to place a pulmonary artery catheter include
signiﬁcantly reduced left or right ventricular function, severe
diastolic dysfunction, recent myocardial infarction, signiﬁcant
pulmonary hypertension, or high surgical complexity \[5\].
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is an invaluable tool that is
also utilized in cardiac anesthesia. Tables 14.4, 14.5, and 14.6
describe some of the many applications of TEE in cardiac anesthesia, as
well as indications and contraindications to use \[6\]. Frequent
perioperative laboratory tests include activated clotting time (ACT) to
ensure adequacy of anticoagulation, and “loaded” arterial blood gas
analysis to evaluate dynamic changes in glucose levels, hemoglobin,
electrolytes, and acid–base status. It may also be necessary to assess
intraoperative coagulation parameters such as platelet count,
international normalized ratio, ﬁbrinogen level, and viscoelastic tests,
to identify speciﬁc mechanisms that contribute to nonsurgical bleeding.

Induction of General Anesthesia To prevent an insurmountable spiral of
circulatory collapse, eﬀorts should be made to minimize hemodynamic
ﬂuctuations throughout the induction of general anesthesia. Strategies
to achieve this might include an opioid and benzodiazepine combination,
etomidate, ketamine, an inhalational agent, or small titrated boluses of
agents such as propofol, with concurrent monitoring of hemodynamics and
vasopressor or inotrope administration. In addition, other
peri-induction agents given to facilitate orotracheal intubation include
intravenous lidocaine and neuromuscular blockade. There are speciﬁc
situations where preservation of spontaneous ventilation should be
attempted, such as severe pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular
failure, or cardiac tamponade. Patients with these disease processes are
especially sensitive to eﬀects of positive pressure ventilation, leading
to increases in right ventricular afterload and right ventricular
failure. Some additional indications to further tailor the technique of
anesthetic induction are described below in corresponding sections under
“Surgery-Speciﬁc Considerations.”

Access An intraarterial catheter is typically placed prior to the
induction of anesthesia. A second arterial line can also be placed for
continuous monitoring of blood pressure, while obtaining blood samples
and monitoring blood pressure on either side of a vascular repair.
Large-bore peripheral and central venous access is

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

222

Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, et al.

Table 14.4 Role of transesophageal echocardiography in cardiac surgery
Evaluation

Impact

LV and RV systolic function

Aids in determining appropriate monitors, ﬂuid resuscitation,
pharmacologic agents, and perioperative mechanical circulatory support

LV diastolic function

Aids in determining optimum heart rate to allow for maximum cardiac
output

Regional wall motion abnormalities

Aids in early detection of ischemia and is predictive of longterm
adverse cardiac events

Ventricular dimensions

Aids in determining failure of the left or right ventricle. Ventricles
that undergo chamber dilatation are less sensitive to preload and
extremely sensitive to increased afterload

Valvular function

Evaluating the severity of valvular lesions aids in determining
hemodynamic goals and may prompt surgical intervention

Aortic atheroma

The presence of large or mobile atheromas have been associated with a
higher incidence of postoperative stroke

Pericardial diseases and eﬀusion

Large pericardial eﬀusions could indicate tamponade pathology. Patients
with pericarditis or pericardial constriction typically have signiﬁcant
blood loss

Anatomic defects

Previously undiagnosed anatomic defects may alter the surgical plan.
Septal defects can result in RV volume overload and pulmonary
hypertension. It is important to look for additional associated
congenital cardiac anomalies (i.e., coronary sinus defects, partial
anomalous venous connection, or cleft anterior mitral valve leaﬂet)

Arterial or mural thrombus

Thrombus in the left atrial appendage or apex of the left ventricle may
prompt thrombectomy or ligation of the left atrial appendage. The
presence of the thrombus should be conﬁrmed with TEE both during and
after surgery

Guide line/cannula placement

Direct visualization can aid in placement of lines and cannulae

De-airing procedures

Direct visualization of the ventricle can aid in this procedure to avoid
air embolism

Surgical feedback

Immediate feedback with the surgical team regarding the adequacy of
surgical repairs and possible collateral injury can prompt additional
intervention prior to leaving the operating room

LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular; TEE, transesophageal
echocardiography.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

223

Table 14.5 Indications for transesophageal echocardiography Valvular
procedures Thoracic aortic surgical procedures Transcatheter
intracardiac procedures (undergoing general anesthesia) Congenital heart
surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy surgery
Resection of cardiac mass Ventricular remodeling surgery Heart
transplantation Pericardiectomy Ventricular assist device insertion
Cannula positioning Septal defect closures Atrial appendage obliteration
CABGa Unexplained hemodynamic instability during any surgical procedure
a

Should be considered for CABG and oﬀ-pump CABG. Generally recommended
for patients with abnormal ventricular function, though may play an
important role in all cases. CABG, coronary artery bypass graft.

routinely obtained to monitor pressures and enable rapid administration
of intravenous ﬂuids, blood products, and vasoactive and inotropic
medications. Ultrasound guidance should be used to guide placement of
central catheters to assess for venous patency and minimize the risk of
iatrogenic puncture of neighboring neural, vascular, or pleural
structures. An introducer can be used to place a pulmonary artery
catheter, a catheter with additional lumens, temporary transvenous
pacing wires, or a retrograde cardioplegia catheter.

General Precardiopulmonary Bypass Management General anesthesia can be
maintained with volatile and/or intravenous agents, with special
attention paid to both the hemodynamics, as well as the depth of
anesthesia, given the high incidence of intraoperative awareness
associated

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

224

Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, et al.

Table 14.6 Contraindications to transesophageal echocardiography
Absolute contraindications

Relative contraindications

Esophageal stricture

Esophageal varices

Esophageal trauma

Acute esophagitis

Esophageal tumor

Barrett’s esophagus

Postesophageal surgery

Restriction of neck mobility (severe cervical arthritis/atlantoaxial
joint disease)

Tracheoesophageal ﬁstula

History of radiation of the neck and mediastinum

Acute upper GI bleed

Coagulopathy History of GI surgery Recent upper GI bleed Acute peptic
ulcer disease

GI, gastrointestinal.

with cardiac surgery. Long-acting neuromuscular blockade and adequate
analgesia should be maintained throughout the procedure to achieve
immobility and blunt the autonomic pain response, respectively. Mean
arterial pressure should be maintained within 20% of each patient’s
baseline, with systolic blood pressure reduced to 100 mmHg prior to
arterial cannulation to minimize the risk of aortic dissection. Once the
arterial cannula is in place, blood pressure should again be raised to
ensure blood pressure is adequate to tolerate retrograde autologous
priming (“RAP”) of the CPB circuit where blood is withdrawn from the
patient. In anticipation of the expected hemodilution that occurs with
the initiation of CPB, it may be necessary to prime the bypass circuit
with packed red blood cells for patients starting oﬀ with extreme
anemia. Lung-protective ventilation, such as tidal volumes of 6 mL kg−1
of ideal body weight, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 mmHg, and
maintaining peak airway pressure &lt;40 mmHg, should generally be
employed. Notable exceptions to this include use of smaller tidal
volumes to minimize lung expansion during internal mammary artery
dissection and redo sternotomy. Ventilation is usually held altogether
for ﬁrsttime sternotomy. Many factors contribute to both surgical and
nonsurgical bleeding in cardiac surgical patients. Preemptive
preparation of blood products and blood conservation techniques are
covered in “Preoperative Evaluation.”

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

225

Anticoagulation Exposure of blood to the synthetic surfaces of the CPB
circuit triggers inﬂammatory cascades, platelet dysfunction, and
activation of both the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways.
Thankfully, widespread thrombosis can generally be prevented altogether
by using high doses of anticoagulation prior to the initiation of CPB.
Due to the availability of a direct reversal agent, the primary
anticoagulant used is unfractionated heparin. Heparin binds antithrombin
III (AT-III) to decrease the activity of thrombin and factor Xa. For
patients with ongoing platelet factor 4 (PF4) antibodies predisposing
them to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) or a known
hypersensitivity reaction to heparin, alternatives include bivalirudin,
argatroban, and removal of PF4 antibodies by plasmapheresis. The short
half-life of bivalirudin makes it a more favorable second choice, though
argatroban may be preferable in patients with reduced kidney function
\[7\]. Initial dosing of heparin is 300–400 units kg−1, with additional
doses titrated to achieve an ACT of 400–480 seconds \[8\]. An
alternative measure of anticoagulation involves the use of ex vivo
heparin dose–response testing, which, despite failure to demonstrate a
reduction in bleeding or blood transfusions, has been used with
increasing popularity. Heparin “resistance” can occur in patients with
hereditary or acquired AT-III deﬁciency and may be seen in patients with
sepsis, platelet dysfunction, or heparin-binding proteins, or in those
on longterm heparin therapy \[9\]. This deﬁciency can be overcome
through the administration of fresh frozen plasma or recombinant AT-III.
Once heparinized, ACT should be monitored at least every 30 minutes.

Management on Cardiopulmonary Bypass Both initiation and separation from
CPB are critical events during cardiac surgery that require careful
coordination among the surgeon, anesthesiologist, and perfusionist.
Sample checklists outlining the necessary items that must occur prior to
each of these events are provided in Table 14.7. Following the
initiation of CPB, there is an expected drop in blood pressure as
systemic viscosity rapidly declines, and vasopressor support may be
necessary if blood pressure does not recover within 1 minute. As CPB
ﬂows are increased to “full ﬂow” (2.2–2.4 L/(min m2), the heart and
lungs become fully bypassed, pulsatility is lost on the arterial
waveform and pulse oximeter, the ventilator can be turned oﬀ, as
necessary, to minimize movement of the operative ﬁeld, and anesthesia
machine alarms and pulse oximetry volume should be temporarily
suspended. Unless a total intravenous anesthetic is being used, the
delivery of volatile agent will need to transition from the ventilator
to the CPB circuit. Vasopressors and dilators should be used to achieve
a mean arterial pressure ≥65 mmHg and a mixed venous oxygen saturation
≥75%. Given a shared responsibility of all members to maintain adequate
hemodynamics when on CPB, and the myriad of situations where ﬂow might
be low (whether intentionally or not), close communication with the
perfusionist is essential to

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

227

manage hemodynamics. Electrolytes should be maintained normal and
glucose should be kept &lt;180 mg dL−1. Core temperature might be
lowered to decrease tissue oxygen demand and injury during periods of
ischemia.

Common Problems Immediately Postcardiopulmonary Bypass Numerous
complications can manifest following CPB, among which the more common
include myocardial dysfunction, vasoplegia, disorders in hemostasis, and
incomplete surgical repair or new collateral injury. These might result
from inadequate myocardial protection during periods of ischemia,
reperfusion injury, coronary spasm, kinked graft or embolism of debris
or air, heightened inﬂammatory responses, endocrine dysfunction, labile
volume status and decreased myocardial tolerance of chamber distension,
electrolyte imbalances, and accumulation of pericardial material (e.g.,
hematoma) following chest closure. Given the expansive diﬀerential
diagnosis of hypotension and inadequate perfusion following cardiac
surgery, comprehensive echocardiographic, laboratory, and hemodynamic
pressure monitoring is necessary to guide the administration of ﬂuids,
blood products, vasoactive agents, inhaled pulmonary vasodilators,
inotropes, and clotting factors. Depending on how refractory
complications are to management, it may be appropriate to discuss with
the surgical team whether it would be appropriate to initiate some form
of mechanical circulatory support, including an intraaortic balloon pump
(IABP), ventricular assist device (VAD), or extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO). Once it has been determined that the patient will
not need to return to CPB for further intervention, heparin is reversed
with protamine (1 mg per 100 units heparin) to achieve normalization of
ACT. Careful administration of protamine is vital as it can cause
profound hypotension, for example if it is administered too quickly.

Postoperative Management Transport Transport of critically ill cardiac
surgical patients carries signiﬁcant risk. Depending on the condition of
the patient, patient transport may include a surgeon, an
anesthesiologist, a perfusionist, and a respiratory therapist. Roles
during transport include moving the bed, tending to the vital sign
monitor, medication infusion settings, and rack of pumps and lines,
providing ventilation for the patient manually or via a transport
ventilator, and transport of a cooler of blood products, extracorporeal
circuit(s), VAD monitor, and inhaled pulmonary vasodilator device.
Additional items to bring include a full tank of supplemental oxygen, a
pacemaker box, suction devices for chest tube drains, emergency
medications, airway equipment, and devices capable of delivering rescue
electrical shocks, as necessary. Clear communication and thorough handoﬀ
of care are paramount to mitigate lapses in attention given to important
issues.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

228

Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, et al.

Extubation Previous Enhanced Recovery After Surgery pathways for cardiac
surgery have promoted the use of short-acting hypnotic drugs,
ultrashort-acting opioids, and reduced total opioid doses \[10\]. This
has resulted in earlier time to extubation (within 6 hours of surgery)
and shorter intensive care unit (ICU) stay, with no increased need for
reintubation, and no diﬀerence in morbidity and mortality or overall
hospital stay. Prolonged mechanical ventilation after cardiac surgery,
on the other hand, is associated with longer hospitalization, higher
morbidity and mortality, increased cost, and increased incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia and dysphagia. Finally, patients should
be free of myocardial ischemia, infarction, or heart failure, and be
hemodynamically stable, with limited inotropic support and adequate
blood gas values while on minimal ventilator settings prior to
extubation. Historically, parenteral opioids were the mainstay of
postoperative pain management after cardiac surgery. However, cardiac
anesthesia has recently shifted from a high-dose narcotic technique to a
more multimodal approach using moderate-dose narcotics, shorter-acting
muscle relaxants, and volatile anesthetic agents, facilitating earlier
tracheal extubation. Some nonnarcotic modalities include regional nerve
blocks, supplementary nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and
acetaminophen.

Surgery-Speciﬁc Considerations In addition to the involved setup and
proceedings common to the majority of cardiac surgical procedures, there
are many speciﬁc situations that further complicate anesthetic
management. Selected types of cases and their unique challenges to the
anesthesiology team are detailed below.

Valve Replacement/Repair Speciﬁc hemodynamic goals for patients with
valvular disease are given in Table 14.8. A thorough TEE evaluation is
essential both before and after valve replacement/repair to aid in
surgical planning and then to identify/grade the severity of residual
disease. In particular, there are several potential complications that
can result from anatomical distortion and placement of circumferential
sutures around the valvular annulus. In particular, defects to the
electrical conduction system, neighboring valve injury, compromised
coronary blood ﬂow, and new dynamic left ventricular outﬂow tract
obstruction should be ruled out.

“Oﬀ-Pump” Cases The use of CPB enables adequate perfusion and gas
exchange, despite heart and lung manipulation, as well as rapid blood
temperature control.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

229

Table 14.8 Induction and maintenance strategies for various valvular
pathology Valvular disease

Induction

Maintenance

Aortic stenosis

Avoid hypotension (treat aggressively with ﬂuids and α-agonists), avoid
tachycardia, caution with dilators (NTG), preload-dependent

Increase LV preload, normal to slow HR, NSR, maintain contractility,
modest increase in SVR, maintain PVR

Aortic regurgitation

High normal HR with afterload reduction

Normal to increased LV preload, modest increase in HR, NSR, maintain
contractility and PVR, decrease SVR

Mitral stenosis

Avoid hypotension/hypovolemia, careful with pulmonary edema, maintain
SVR, avoid tachycardia

Normal to increased LV preload, decreased HR, NSR, maintain
contractility, normal SVR, avoid increased PVR

Mitral regurgitation

Maintain preload and contractility, reduce afterload, avoid increased
PVR

Normal to increased LV preload, increased HR, NSR, maintain
contractility, decrease SVR, avoid increased PVR

Tricuspid regurgitation

Maintain preload and contractility, avoid increased PVR

Adequate preload, normal to increased HR, normal contractility, avoid
increased PVR

NTG, nitroglycerin; LV, left ventricular; HR, heart rate; NSR, normal
sinus rhythm; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; PVR, pulmonary vascular
resistance.

However, many procedures can be performed “oﬀ pump.” For these cases, it
may be diﬃcult to maintain stable hemodynamics and close communication
with the surgical team is paramount. In particular, myocardial
stabilizers, surgical retractors that minimize cardiac movement, and
manipulation of cardiovascular structures may compromise chamber ﬁlling
and ejection. Also, though full aortic cross-clamps are not used,
partial “side-biting” clamps might be used, restricting blood ﬂow. It is
also important to maintain ambient room temperature and utilize external
conductive and/or convective warming systems to minimize the eﬀects of
evaporative cooling. Minimizing ventilatory tidal volumes is often
necessary to decrease the movement of cardiac structures. A perfusionist
is always present during these cases, should the patient become too
unstable and require CPB.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

230

Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, et al.

Minimally Invasive Procedures For minimally invasive procedures,
surgeons perform either a partial sternotomy or a thoracotomy, instead
of a full sternotomy, for access and exposure. For these cases, lung
isolation and/or smaller tidal volumes are often necessary. Less
surgical exposure might lead to lengthier procedures, the need for
intravascularly placed lines or devices (e.g., retrograde cardioplegia
catheter insertion through an introducer or a balloon-tipped catheter to
occlude ﬂow in the ascending aorta, in lieu of an external cross-clamp),
and diﬃcult repair of surgical mishaps. Further, in the event of cardiac
arrest, direct cardiac massage or delivery of an electric shock might
not be possible and therefore, peripheral cannulation access for CPB and
external deﬁbrillator pads are important considerations.

Aortic Arch Repairs For repairs of the distal ascending aorta and aortic
arch, the presence of aortic disease and need for surgical exposure may
preclude aortic cannulation and cross-clamping for CPB. In lieu of these
techniques, alternative strategies of cerebral protection are required.
Depending on the extent of vascular disease, vessels such as either the
innominate or the right axillary artery, can be cannulated to initiate
CPB and full body induction of deep hypothermia. To facilitate cerebral
cooling, bags of ice can be applied externally to the patient’s head.
Once metabolic demand is suﬃciently reduced, either temporary whole-body
circulatory arrest or selective cerebral perfusion may be performed
while the surgeon completes the ﬁnal anastomoses. Afterward, full CPB
ﬂows are restored to the body and rewarming begins. For these
procedures, bilateral invasive blood pressure monitoring is usually
required. This can be especially useful to monitor the pressure of
anterograde cerebral perfusion (i.e., using a right upper extremity
arterial line) and detect discrepancies in ﬂow on either side of the
ﬁnal repair. Coagulopathy and platelet dysfunction can be especially
diﬃcult to manage following deep hypothermia.

Septal Myectomy Patients undergoing septal myectomy (also known as
“debulking”) are at especially high risk of hemodynamic collapse with
the induction of anesthesia, resulting from dynamic left ventricular
outﬂow tract obstruction and diastolic dysfunction. Eﬀorts should
therefore be made to avoid tachycardia and maintain adequate systemic
vascular resistance and left ventricular preload, especially prior to
the repair. Hypotension should be preferentially managed with
phenylephrine and volume resuscitation over inotropic agents, and normal

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

231

sinus rhythm should be maintained. Following the repair, care should be
maintained to rule out any new iatrogenic defects of the electrical
conduction system and/or interventricular septum.

Left Ventricular Assist Devices Patients with advanced heart failure may
require implantation of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) to
function as either destination therapy or as a bridge to heart
transplantation. Factors that might complicate or contraindicate LVAD
placement include greater than mild right ventricular dysfunction, mural
thrombus at the LVAD inﬂow cannulation site, extensive ascending aortic
disease at the LVAD outﬂow cannulation site, and small left ventricular
internal chamber size. Cardiac pathology requiring concurrent repair to
enable proper LVAD function includes intracardiac shunting, including a
patent foramen ovale, greater than mild aortic insuﬃciency, greater than
mild mitral stenosis, and severe tricuspid regurgitation. LVADs are
generally placed on CPB, but without aortic cross-clamping and cardiac
arrest – that is, assuming no other concurrent repairs are necessary.
TEE is invaluable in assisting the surgical team with proper cannula
positioning and titration of optimal pump ﬂow. Excessive LVAD ﬂows can
lead to left ventricular chamber collapse (also known as “suck-down”), a
condition that leads to an abrupt cessation of blood ﬂow. Maintenance of
adequate function of the right ventricle is especially critical, as a
properly functioning LVAD increases right ventricular preload, which can
lead to progressive chamber dilatation and failure.

Heart Transplantation Multidisciplinary coordination of when anesthesia
and surgical preparation of a heart transplant recipient should commence
is challenging, yet very important. Additional preparation unique to
this procedure may include the need for aspiration precautions,
initiation of perioperative immunosuppression, reversal of prophylactic
anticoagulation (e.g., for patients on warfarin for an LVAD), and
additional hemostatic agents/blood products. Posttransplantation, TEE
should be used to evaluate for early graft dysfunction and stenoses at
anastomotic sites. Additional pharmacologic or mechanical support may be
necessary to manage right ventricular failure, decreased systemic
vascular resistance, and bleeding following CPB separation.

Pericardial Window or Resection of Anterior Mediastinal Mass Whether due
to pericardial ﬂuid or an anterior mediastinal mass, external
compression on central cardiovascular structures can lead to cardiac
tamponade pathophysiology. In this setting, some or all chambers of the
heart are

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

232

Alan M. Smeltz, Logan Gray, Austin Erney, et al.

restricted in their ability to fully expand and ﬁll between
contractions, compromising cardiac output. In general, the
thinner-walled right-sided chambers tend to be the most aﬀected. These
patients beneﬁt from maintenance of adequate heart rate, preload,
contractility, and systemic vascular resistance. Of utmost importance,
eﬀorts should be made to minimize any further increases in intrathoracic
pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance. This often involves the
maintenance of spontaneous ventilation throughout the induction of
anesthesia, via either inhalational agents or ketamine, or small
titrated doses of agents such as etomidate or propofol. In addition to
predisposing to the collapse of cardiovascular structures with positive
pressure ventilation, the presence of mediastinal masses also
predisposes to airway collapse. Induction strategies include awake
ﬁberoptic intubation to place the tip of a reinforced endotracheal tube
beyond the point of obstruction. It is recommended that rigid
bronchoscopy be readily available, as needed, in these patients. Due to
the heightened risk in these patients, it is advisable to have the
surgical team in the room, with the patient prepped and draped for
surgery prior to the induction of anesthesia.

Catheter-Based Cardiac Procedures Catheter-based cardiac procedures
serve as an alternative to surgery for many types of cardiac diseases.
On the one hand, avoidance of large surgical incisions and CPB has been
associated with improved outcomes and decreased hospital length of stay.
On the other hand, procedures performed outside of a standard operating
room setting in the absence of surgical access pose unique challenges.
For many of these procedures, a cardiothoracic surgery team and CPB
machine should be in the room in case they are needed to repair an
iatrogenic injury in the event of a mishap. Possible inadvertent damage
can include an aortic or ventricular wall perforation, cardiac
tamponade, valve leaﬂet or subvalvular apparatus tear, acute coronary
ostial obstruction, and electrical conduction defect. Whether or not the
patient is under sedation or intubated for general anesthesia can
determine whether or not transthoracic echocardiography or TEE is used
to monitor and diagnose periprocedural success and complications.

Lead Extraction Reasons pacemaker leads might require LASER-assisted
extraction include infection, venous occlusion, device recall/failure,
and device upgrade. Perioperatively, the device should be evaluated and
reprogrammed, and a temporary transvenous pacemaker and/or
transcutaneous pads may be placed. Avulsion injury to cardiac structures
can occur with lead extraction, leading to complications similar to
those that may be seen with transcatheter procedures (see
“Catheter-Based Cardiac Procedures” ), as well as pneumothorax.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Cardiac Anesthesiology

233

References 1. Szelkowski LA, Puri NK, Singh R, et al. Current trends in
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative care of the adult
cardiac surgery patient. Curr Probl Surg. 2015;52:531–69. 2. Shehata N,
Whitlock R, Fergusson DA, et al. Transfusion Requirements in Cardiac
Surgery III (TRICS III): study design of a randomized controlled trial.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2018;32:121–9. 3. Hughes DB, Ullery BW,
Barie PS. The contemporary approach to the care of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
J Trauma. 2008;65:237–47. 4. Roselli EE. Reoperative cardiac surgery:
challenges and outcomes. Tex Heart Inst J. 2011;38:669–71. 5. Sandham
JD, Hull RD, Brant RF, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of the use
of pulmonary-artery catheters in high-risk surgical patients. N Engl J
Med. 2003;348:5–14. 6. Nicoara A, Swaminathan M. Diastolic dysfunction,
diagnostic and perioperative management in cardiac surgery. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol. 2015;28:60–6. 7. Agarwal S, Ullom B, Al-Baghdadi Y, et al.
Challenges encountered with argatroban anticoagulation during
cardiopulmonary bypass. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol. 2012;28:106–10.
8. Shore-Lesserson L, Baker RA, Ferraris VA, et al. The Society of
Thoracic Surgeons, The Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, and
The American Society of ExtraCorporeal Technology: clinical practice
guidelines – anticoagulation during cardiopulmonary bypass. Ann Thorac
Surg. 2018;105:650–62. 9. Avidan MS, Levy JH, van Aken H, et al.
Recombinant human antithrombin III restores heparin responsiveness and
decreases activation of coagulation in heparin-resistant patients during
cardiopulmonary bypass. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130:107–13. 10.
Myles PS, Daly DJ, Djaiani G, et al. A systematic review of the safety
and eﬀectiveness of fast-track cardiac anesthesia. Anesthesiology.
2003;99:982–7.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.016 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Chapter

15

Vascular Anesthesia Jeffrey Park

Introduction Anesthetic management of vascular surgery is highly
demanding, due to physiologic perturbations caused by major vascular
procedures, as well as the high burden of existing atherosclerotic
disease or disease equivalents that are often poorly controlled in this
patient population. The perioperative care of the vascular patient is
often complex, requiring a thorough preoperative evaluation,
sophisticated intraoperative management, and attentive postoperative
care. Of paramount importance to the anesthesiologist is the likelihood
of major adverse cardiac events (MACEs), the incidence of which may be
mitigated by appropriate risk stratiﬁcation and a detailed understanding
of speciﬁc major vascular surgical procedures.

Preoperative Assessment and Risk Stratiﬁcation Among noncardiac surgical
procedures, the risk of MACEs has remained highest in vascular surgery,
accounting for 7.7% of cases between 2004 and 2013 \[1\]. Prior
myocardial infarction (MI) or stroke are both important independent risk
factors for MACE, so appropriate screening, evaluation, and testing of
these and other high-risk patients who present for elective vascular
surgery may reduce their overall risk. Preoperative testing for
nonemergent vascular surgery varies widely; it is important to note that
there are no Class I recommendations for testing supported by the
American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association
(AHA). The following table outlines the recommendations of the ACC/AHA
for supplemental tests that may be of use in speciﬁc clinical scenarios
and patient populations (see Table 15.1). The decision for testing
should be made with consensus agreement among the surgeon,
anesthesiologist, and cardiologist, if applicable. There is more
substantial evidence regarding coronary revascularization and management
of such patients. Routine coronary revascularization is not recommended,
but patients who meet cardiac indications for undergoing percutaneous
coronary intervention should delay noncardiac surgery, depending on the
intervention (14 days after percutaneous old balloon 234

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.017 Published online by Cambridge
University Press

Vascular Anesthesia

235

Table 15.1 Common preoperative tests and recommendations in noncardiac
surgery 12-lead ECG

• Class IIa recommendation – should be considered for a history of
coronary artery disease, signiﬁcant arrhythmia, peripheral artery
disease, and stroke • Class IIb recommendation – may be considered in
asymptomatic patients without a history of the above

Transthoracic echocardiography

• Class IIa recommendation – should be consid-

Exercise or pharmacologic stress testing

• Class IIa recommendation – patients with excellent

Coronary angiography

• Class III recommendation – routine preoperative

ered in patients with a history of HF and a change in clinical status,
and dyspnea without known origin • Class IIb recommendation – may be
considered in clinically stable HF patients without a recent (&lt;1
year) echocardiogram • Class III recommendation – there is no evidence
of beneﬁt in performing routine echocardiography in asymptomatic
patients functional capacity (&gt;10 METs) require no further testing •
Class IIb recommendation – a stress test can be performed for patients
with poor or unknown functional capacity if the test result will change
management coronary angiography is not recommended

HF, heart failure; MET, metabolic equivalent. Source: Adapted from 2014
ACC/AHA recommendations.

angioplasty (POBA), 30 days after bare metal stent (BMS), and 365 days
after drug-eluting stent (DES)) \[2\]. Special circumstances and
pathologies may warrant additional investigation. The presence of
valvular lesions, pulmonary hypertension and/or right ventricular (RV)
dysfunction, and indwelling pacemakers or an automatic
implantable–cardioverter deﬁbrillator (AICD) should prompt further
evaluation and involve expert consultation, if possible, as these
factors tend to be independently associated with a greater incidence of
MACEs \[3\]. The anesthesiologist should also consider, in addition to
the risk of MACEs, the impact of major vascular surgery on postoperative
renal function. The balance of oxygen supply and demand is often
disrupted during

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108936941.017 Published online by Cambridge
University Press


